I was born in 1914 in a solid, three-story, brick house
in a large Midwest city. My parents were comfortable. My
father owned and ran a lumber business. The house had a
lawn in front, a back yard with a garden, a fish pond and a
high wooden fence all around it. I remember the lamplighter
lighting the gas streetlights and the huge, black,
shiny Lincoln and drives in the park on Sunday. All the
props of a safe, comfortable way of life that is now gone
forever. I could put down one of those nostalgic routines
about the old German doctor who lived next door and the
rats running around in the back yard and my aunt's electric
car and my pet toad that lived by the fish pond.
Actually my earliest memories are colored by a fear
of nightmares. I was afraid to be alone, and afraid of the
dark, and afraid to go to sleep because of dreams where a
supernatural horror seemed always on the point of taking
shape. I was afraid some day the dream would still be there
when I woke up. I recall hearing a maid talk about opium
and how smoking opium brings sweet dreams, and I said:
"I will smoke opium when I grow up."
I was subject to hallucinations as a child. Once I woke
up in the early morning light and saw little men playing in
a block house I had made. I felt no fear, only a feeling of
stillness and wonder. Another recurrent hallucination or
nightmare concerned "animals in the wall," and started
with the delirium of a strange, undiagnosed fever that I
had at the age of four or five.
I went to a progressive school with the future solid
citizens, the lawyers, doctors and businessmen of a large
Midwest town. I was timid with the other children and
afraid of physical violence. One aggressive little Lesbian
would pull my hair whenever she saw me. I would like to
shove her face in right now, but she fell off a horse and
broke her neck years ago.
When I was about seven my parents decided to move
to the suburbs "to get away from people." They bought a
large house with grounds and woods and a fish pond where
there were squirrels instead of rats. They lived there in a
comfortable capsule, with a beautiful garden and cut off
from contact with the life of the city.
I went to a private suburban high school. I was not
conspicuously good or bad at sports, neither brilliant nor
backward in studies. I had a definite blind spot for mathematics
or anything mechanical. I never liked competitive
team games and avoided these whenever possible. I became,
in fact, a chronic malingerer. I did like fishing, hunting
and hiking. I read more than was usual for an American
boy of that time and place: Oscar Wilde, Anatole
France, Baudelaire, even Cide. I formed a romantic attachment
for another boy and we spent our Saturdays exploring
old quarries, riding around on bicycles and fishing
in ponds and rivers.
At this time, I was greatly impressed by an autobiography
of a burglar, called You Can't Win. The author
claimed to have spent a good part of his life in jail. It
sounded good to me compared with the dullness of a Midwest
suburb where all contact with life was shut out. I saw
my friend as an ally, a partner in crime. We found an
abandoned factory and broke all the windows and stole a
chisel. We were caught, and our fathers had to pay the
damages. After this my friend "packed me in" because the
relationship was endangering his standing with the group. I
saw there was no compromise possible with the group, the
others, and I found myself a good deal alone.
The environment was empty, the antagonist hidden,
and I drifted into solo adventures. My criminal acts were
gestures, unprofitable and for the most part unpunished. I
would break into houses and walk around without taking
anything. As a matter of fact, I had no need for money.
Sometimes I would drive around in the country with a .22
rifle, shooting chickens. I made the roads unsafe with reckless
driving until an accident, from which I emerged
miraculously and portentously unscratched, scared me into
normal caution.
I went to one of the Big Three universities, where I
majored in English literature for lack of interest in any
other subject. I hated the University and I hated the town
it was in. Everything about the place was dead. The University
was a fake English setup taken over by the graduates
of fake English public schools. I was lonely. I knew no
one, and strangers were regarded with distaste by the
closed corporation of the desirables.
By accident I met some rich homosexuals, of the international
queer set who cruise around the world, bumping
into each other in queer joints from New York to
Cairo. I saw a way of life, a vocabulary, references, a
whole symbol system, as the sociologists say. But these
people were jerks for the most part and, after an initial
period of fascination, I cooled off on the setup.
When I graduated without honors, I had one hundred
fifty dollars per month in trust. That was in the depression
and there were no jobs and I couldn't think of any job I
wanted, in any case. I drifted around Europe for a year or
so. Remnants of the postwar decay lingered in Europe.
U.S. dollars could buy a good percentage of the inhabitants
of Austria, male or female. That was in 1936, and the
Nazis were closing in fast.
I went back to the States. With my trust fund I could
live without working or hustling. I was still cut off from
life as I had been in the Midwest suburb. I fooled around
taking graduate courses in psychology and Jiu-Jitsu lessons.
I decided to undergo psychoanalysis, and continued
with it for three years. Analysis removed inhibitions and
anxiety so that I could live the way I wanted to live. Much
of my progress in analysis was accomplished in spite of my
analyst who did not like my "orientation," as he called it.
He finally abandoned analytic objectivity and put me down
as an "out-and-out con." I was more pleased with the resuits
than he was.
After being rejected on physical grounds from five
officer-training programs, I was drafted into the Army and
certified fit for unlimited service. I decided I was not going
to like the Army and copped out on my nut-house record
-- I'd once got on a Van Gogh kick and cut off a finger
joint to impress someone who interested me at the time.
The nut-house doctors had never heard of Van Gogh. They
put me down for schizophrenia, adding paranoid type to
explain the upsetting fact that I knew where I was and who
was President of the U.S. When the Army saw that diagnosis
they discharged me with the notation, "This man is
never to be recalled or reclassified."
After parting company with the Army, I took a vanety
of jobs. You could have about any job you wanted at
that time. I worked as a private detective, an exterminator,
a bartender. I worked in factories and offices. I played
around the edges of crime. But my hundred and fifty dollars
per month was always there. I did not have to have
money. It seemed a romantic extravagance to jeopardize
my freedom by some token act of crime. It was at this time
and under these circumstances that I came in contact with
junk, became an addict, and thereby gained the motivation,
the real need for money I had never had before.
The question is frequently asked: Why does a man
become a drug addict?
The answer is that he usually does not intend to become
an addict. You don't wake up one morning and
decide to be a drug addict. It takes at least three months'
shooting twice a day to get any habit at all. And you don't
really know what junk sickness is until you have had several
habits. It took me almost six months to get my first
habit, and then the withdrawal symptoms were mild. I
think it no exaggeration to say it takes about a year and
several hundred injections to make an addict.
The questions, of course, could be asked: Why did
you ever try narcotics? Why did you continue using it long
enough to become an addict? You become a narcotics
addict because you do not have strong motivations in any
other direction. Junk wins by default. I tried it as a matter
of curiosity. I drifted along taking shots when I could
score. I ended up hooked. Most addicts I have talked to
report a similar experience. They did not start using drugs
for any reason they can remember. They just drifted along
until they got hooked. If you have never been addicted,
you can have no clear idea what it means to need junk
with the addict's special need. You don't decide to be an
addict. One morning you wake up sick and you're an addict.
I have never regretted my experience with drugs. I
think I am in better health now as a result of using junk at
intervals than I would be if I had never been an addict.
When you stop growing you start dying. An addict never
stops growing. Most users periodically kick the habit,
which involves shrinking of the organism and replacement
of the junk-dependent cells. A user is in continual state of
shrinking and growing in his daily cycle of shot-need for
shot completed.
Most addicts look younger than they are. Scientists
recently experimented with a worm that they were able to
shrink by withholding food. By periodically shrinking the
worm so that it was in continual growth, the worm's life
was prolonged indefinitely. Perhaps if a junky could keep
himself in a constant state of kicking, he would live to a
phenomenal age.
Junk is a cellular equation that teaches the user facts
of general validity. I have learned a great deal from using
junk: I have seen life measured out in eyedroppers of
morphine solution. I experienced the agonizing deprivation
of junk sickness, and the pleasure of relief when junkthirsty
cells drank from the needle. Perhaps all pleasure is
relief. I have learned the cellular stoicism that junk teaches
the user. I have seen a cell full of sick junkies silent and
immobile in separate misery. They knew the pointlessness
of complaining or moving. They knew that basically no
one can help anyone else. There is no key, no secret someone
else has that he can give you.
I have learned the junk equation. Junk is not, like
alcohol or weed, a means to increased enjoyment of life.
Junk is not a kick. It is a way of life.
My first experience with junk was during the War,
about 1944 or 1945. I had made the acquaintance of a
man named Norton who was working in a shipyard at the
time. Norton, whose real name was Morelli or something
like that, had been discharged from the peacetime Army
for forging a pay check, and was classified 4-F for reasons
of bad character. He looked like George Raft, but was
taller. Norton was trying to improve his English and
achieve a smooth, affable manner. Affability, however, did
not come natural to him. In repose, his expression was
sullen and mean, and you knew he always had that mean
look when you turned your back.
Norton was a hard-working thief, and he did not feel
right unless he stole something every day from the shipyard
where he worked. A tool, some canned goods, a pair of
overalls, anything at all. One day he called me up and said
he had stolen a Tommy gun. Could I find someone to buy
it? I said, "Maybe. Bring it over."
The housing shortage was getting under way. I paid
fifteen dollars a week for a dirty apartment that opened
onto a companionway and never got any sunlight. The
wallpaper was flaking off because the radiator leaked steam
when there was any steam in it to leak. I had the windows
sealed shut against the cold with a caulking of newspapers.
The place was full of roaches and occasionally I killed a
bedbug.
I was sitting by the radiator, a little damp from the
steam, when I heard Norton's knock. I opened the door,
and there he was standing in the dark hail with a big parcel
wrapped in brown paper under his arm. He smiled and
said, "Hello."
I said, "Come in, Norton, and take off your coat."
He unwrapped the Tommy gun and we assembled it
and snapped the firing pin.
I said I would find someone to buy it.
Norton said, "Oh, here's something else I picked up."
It was a flat yellow box with five one-half grain syrettes
of morphine tartrate.
"This is just a sample," he said, indicating the morphine.
"I've got fifteen of these boxes at home and I can
get more if you get rid of these."
I said, "I'll see what I can do."
At that time I had never used any junk and it did not
occur to me to try it. I began looking for someone to buy
the two items and that is how I ran into Roy and Herman.
I knew a young hoodlum from upstate New York who
was working as a short-order cook in Riker's, "cooling off,"
as he explained. I called him and said I had something to
get rid of, and made an appointment to meet him in the
Angle Bar on Eighth Avenue near 42nd Street.
This bar was a meeting place for 42nd Street hustlers,
a peculiar breed of four-flushing would-be criminals. They
are always looking for a "setup man," someone to plan
jobs and tell them exactly what to do. Since no "setup
man" would have anything to do with people so obviously
inept, unlucky, and unsuccessful, they go on looking,
fabricating preposterous lies about their big scores, cooling
off as dishwashers, soda jerks, waiters, occasionally rolling
a drunk or a timid queer, looking, always looking, for the
"setup man" with a big job who will say, "I've been watching
you. You're the man I need for this setup. Now
listen . .
Jack -- through whom I met Roy and Herman -- was
not one of these lost sheep looking for the shepherd with a
diamond ring and a gun in the shoulder holster and the
hard, confident voice with overtones of connections, fixes,
setups that would make a stickup sound easy and sure of
success. Jack was very successful from time to time and
would turn up in new clothes and even new cars. He was
also an inveterate liar who seemed to lie more for himself
than for any visible audience. He had a clean-cut, healthy
country face, but there was something curiously diseased
about him. He was subject to sudden fluctuations in weight,
like a diabetic or a sufferer from liver trouble. These
changes in weight were often accompanied by an uncontrollable
fit of restlessness, so that he would disappear for
some days.
The effect was uncanny. You would see him one time
a fresh-faced kid. A week or so later he would turn up so
thin, sallow and old-looking, you would have to look twice
to recognize him. His face was lined with suffering in
which his eyes did not participate. It was a suffering of his
cells alone. He himself -- the conscious ego that looked out
of the glazed, alert-calm hoodlum eyes -- would have nothing
to do with this suffering of his rejected other self, a
suffering of the nervous system, of flesh and viscera and
cells.
He slid into the booth where I was sitting and ordered
a shot of whiskey. He tossed it off, put the glass down and
looked at me with his head tilted a little to one side and
back.
"What's this guy got?" he said.
"A Tommy gun and about thirty-five grains of morphine."
"The morphine I can get rid of right away, but the
Tommy gun may take a little time."
Two detectives walked in and leaned on the bar talking
to the bartender. Jack jerked his head in their direction.
"The law. Let's take a walk."
I followed him out of the bar. He walked through the
door sliding sideways. "I'm taking you to someone who
will want the morphine," he said. "You want to forget this
address."
We went down to the bottom level of the Independent
Subway. Jack's voice, talking to his invisible audience,
went on and on. He had a knack of throwing his voice
directly into your consciousness. No external noise
drowned him out. "Give me a thirty-eight every time. lust
flick back the hammer and let her go. I'll drop anyone at
five hundred feet. Don't care what you say. My brother has
two 30-caliber machine guns stashed in Iowa."
We got off the subway and began to walk on snowcovered
sidewalks between tenements.
"The guy owed me for a long time, see? I knew he
had it but he wouldn't pay, so I waited for him when he
finished work. I had a roll of nickels. No one can hang
anything on you for carrying U.S. currency. Told me he
was broke. I cracked his jaw and took my money off him.
Two of his friends standing there, but they kept out of it.
I'd've switched a blade on them."
We were walking up tenement stairs. The stairs were
made of worn black metal. We stopped in front of a narrow,
metal-covered door, and Jack gave an elaborate knock
inclining his head to the floor like a safecracker. The door
was opened by a large, flabby, middle-aged queer, with
tattooing on his forearms and even on the backs of his
hands.
"This is Joey," Jack said, and Joey said, "Hello there.t'
Jack pulled a five-dollar bill from his pocket and gave
it to Joey. "Get us a quart of Schenley's, will you, Joey?"
Joey put on an overcoat and went out.
In many tenement apartments the front door opens
directly into the kitchen. This was such an apartment and
we were in the kitchen.
After Joey went out I noticed another man who was
standing there looking at me. Waves of hostility and suspicion
flowed out from his large brown eyes like some sort
of television broadcast. The effect was almost like a physical
impact. The man was small and very thin, his neck
loose in the collar of his shirt. His complexion faded from
brown to a mottled yellow, and pancake make-up had been
heavily applied in an attempt to conceal a skin eruption.
His mouth was drawn down at the corners in a grimace of
petulant annoyance.
"Who's this?" he said. His name, I learned later, was
Herman.
"Friend of mine. He's got some morphine he wants to
get rid of."
Herman shrugged and turned out his hands. "I don't
think I want to bother, really."
"Okay," Jack said, "we'll sell it to someone else. Come
on, Bill."
We went into the front room. There was a small
radio, a china Buddha with a votive candle in front of it,
pieces of bric-a-brac: A man was lying on a studio couch.
He sat up as we entered the room and said hello and smiled
pleasantly, showing discolored, brownish teeth. It was a
Southern voice with the accent of East Texas.
Jack said, "Roy, this is a friend of mine. He Has some
morphine he wants to sell."
The man sat up straighter and swung his legs off the
couch. His jaw fell slackly, giving his face a vacant look.
The skin of his face was smooth and brown. The cheekbones
were high and he looked Oriental. His ears stuck out
at right angles from his asymmetrical skull. The eyes were
brown and they had a peculiar brilliance, as though points
of light were shining behind them. The light in the room
glinted on the points of light in his eyes like an opal.
"How much do you have?" he asked me.
"Seventy-five half grain syrettes."
"The regular price is two dollars a grain," he said,
"but syrettes go for a little less. People want tablets. Those
syrettes have too much water and you have to squeeze the
stuff out and cook it down." He paused and his face went
blank: "I could go about one-fifty a grain," he said finally.
"I guess that will be okay," I said.
He asked how we could make contact and I gave him
my phone number.
Joey came back with the whiskey and we all had a
drink. Herman stuck his head in from the kitchen and said
to Jack, "Could I talk to you for a minute?"
I could hear them arguing about something. Then
Jack came back and Herman stayed in the kitchen. We all
had a few drinks and Jack began telling a story.
"My partner was going through the joint. The guy was
sleeping, and I was standing over him with a three-foot
length of pipe. I found in the bathroom. The pipe had a
faucet on the end of it, see? All of a sudden he comes up
and jumps straight out of bed, running. I let him have it
with the faucet end, and he goes on running right out into
the other room, the blood spurting out of his head ten feet
every time his heart beat." He made a pumping motion
with his hand. "You could see the brain there and the
blood coming out of It." Jack began to laugh uncontrollably.
"My girl was waiting out in the car. She called me --
ha-ha-ha! -- she called me -- ha-ha-ha! -- a cold-blooded
killer."
He laughed until his face was purple.
A few nights after meeting Roy and Herman, I used
one of the syrettes, which was my first experience with
junk. A syrette is like a toothpaste tube with a needle on
the end. You push a pin down through the needle; the pin
punctures the seal; and the syrette is ready to shoot.
Morphine hits the backs of the legs first, then the back
of the neck, a spreading wave of relaxation slackening the
muscles away from the bones so that you seem to float
without outlines, like lying in warm salt water. As this
relaxing wave spread through my tissues, I experienced a
strong feeling of fear. I had the feeling that some horrible
image was just beyond the field of vision, moving, as I
turned my head, so that I never quite saw it. I felt nauseous;
I lay down and closed my eyes. A series of pictures
passed, like watching a movie: A huge, neon-lighted cocktail
bar that got larger and larger until streets, traffic, and
street repairs were included in it; a waitress carrying a skull
on a tray; stars in the clear sky. The physical impact of the
fear of death; the shutting off of breath; the stopping of
blood.
I dozed off and woke up with a start of fear. Next
mowing I vomited and felt sick until noon.
Roy called that night.
"About what we were discussing the other night," he
said. "I could go about four dollars per box and take five
boxes now. Are you busy? I'll come over to your place.
We'll come to some kind of agreement."
A few minutes later he knocked at the door. He had
on a Glen plaid suit and a dark, coffee-colored shirt. We
said hello. He looked around blankly and said, "If you
don't mind, I'll take one of those now."
I opened the box. He took out a syrette and injected it
into his leg. He pulled up his pants briskly and took out
twenty dollars. I put five boxes on the kitchen table.
"I think I'll take them out of the boxes," he said. "Too
bulky."
He began putting the syrettes in his coat pockets. "I
don't think they'll perforate this way," he said. "Listen, I'll
call you again in a day or so after I get rid of these and
have some more money." He was adjusting his hat over his
asymmetrical skull. "I'll see you."
Next day he was back. He shot another syrette and
pulled out forty dollars. I laid out ten boxes and kept
two.
"These are for me," I said.
He looked at me, surprised. "You use it?"
"Now and then."
"It's bad stuff," he said, shaking his head. "The worst
thing that can happen to a man. We all think we can
control it at first. Sometimes we don't want to control it."
He laughed. "I'll take all you can get at this price."
Next day he was back. He asked if I didn't want to
change my mind about selling the two boxes. I said no. He
bought two syrettes for a dollar each, shot them both, and
left. He said he had signed on for a two-month trip.
During the next month I used up the eight syrettes I
had not sold. The fear I had experienced after using the
first syrette was not noticeable after the third; but still,
from time to time, after taking a shot I would wake up
with a start of fear. After six weeks or so I gave Roy a
ring, not expecting him to be back from his trip, but then 1
heard his voice on the phone.
I said, "Say, do you have any to sell? Of the material I
sold you before?"
There was a pause.
"Ye-es," be said, "I can let you have six, but the price
will have to be three dollars per. You understand I don't
have many.
"Okay," I said. "You know the way. Bring it on over."
It was twelve one-half grain tablets in a thin glass
tube. I paid him eighteen dollars and he apologized again
for the retail rate.
Next day he bought two grains back.
"It's mighty hard to get now at any price," He said,
looking for a vein in his leg. He finally hit a vein and shot
the liquid in with an air bubble. "If air bubbles could kill
you, there wouldn't be a junky alive."
Later that day Roy pointed out to me a drugstore
where they sold needles without any questions -- very few
drugstores will sell them without a prescription. He showed
me how to make a collar out of paper to fit the needle to
an eyedropper. An eyedropper is easier to use than a regular
hypo, especially for giving yourself vein shots.
Several days later Roy sent me to see a doctor with a
story about kidney stones, to hit him for a morphine prescription.
The doctor's wife slammed the door in my face,
but Roy finally got past her and made the doctor for a tengrain
script.
The doctor's office was in junk territory on 102nd, off
Broadway. He was a doddering old man and could not
resist the junkies who filled his office and were, in fact, his
only patients. It seemed to give him a feeling of importance
to look out and see an office full of people. I guess he had
reached a point where he could change the appearance of
things to suit his needs and when he looked out there he
saw a distinguished and diversified clientele, probably welldressed
in 1910 style, instead of a bunch of ratty-looking
junkies come to hit him for a morphine script.
Roy shipped out at two- or three-week intervals. His
trips were Army Transport and generally short. When he
was in town we generally split a few scripts. The old
croaker on 102nd finally lost his mind altogether and no
drugstore would fill his scripts, but Roy located an Italian
doctor out in the Bronx who would write.
I was taking a shot from time to time, but I was a
long way from having a habit. At this time I moved into an
apartment on the Lower East Side. It was a tenement
apartment with the front door opening into the kitchen.
I began dropping into the Angle Bar every night and
saw quite a bit of Herman. I managed to overcome his
original bad impression of me, and soon I was buying his
drinks and meals, and he was hitting me for "smash"
(change) at regular intervals. Herman did not have a habit
at this time. In fact, he seldom got a habit unless someone
else paid for it. But he was always high on something --
weed, benzedrine, or knocked out of his mind on "goof
balls." He showed up at the Angle every night with a big
slob of a Polack called Whitey. There were four Whities in
the Angle set, which made for confusion. This Whitey
combined the sensitivity of a neurotic with a psychopath's
readiness for violence. He was convinced that nobody liked
him, a fact that seemed to cause him a great deal of worry.
One Tuesday night Roy and I were standing at the
end of the Angle bar. Subway Mike was there, and Frankie
Dolan. Dolan was an Irish bay with a cast in one eye. He
specialized in crummy scores, beating up defenseless
drunks, and holding out on his confederates. "I got no
honor," he would say. "I'm a rat." And he would giggle.
Subway Mike had a large, pale face and long teeth.
He looked like some specialized kind of underground animal
that preys on the animals of the surface. lie was a
skillful lush-worker, but he had no front. Any cop would
do a doubletake at sight of him, and he was well known to
the subway squad. So Mike spent at least half of his time
on the Island doing the five-twenty-nine for jostling,.
This night Herman was knocked out on "nembies"
and his head kept falling down onto the bar. Whitey was
stomping up and down the length of the bar trying to
promote some free drinks. The boys at the bar sat rigid and
tense, clutching their drinks, quickly pocketing their
change. I heard Whitey say to the bartender, "Keep this for
me, will you?" and he passed his large clasp knife across
the bar. The boys sat there silent and gloomy under the
fluorescent lights. They were all afraid of Whitey, all except
Roy. Roy sipped his beer grimly. His eyes shone with
their peculiar phosphorescence. His long asymmetrical
body was draped against the bar. He didn't look at Whitey,
but at the opposite wall where the booths were located.
Once he said to me, "He's no more drunk than I am. He's
just thirsty."
Whitey was standing in the middle of the bar, his fists
doubled up, tears streaming down his face. "I'm no good,"
he said. "I'm no good. Can't anyone understand I don't
know what I'm doing?"
The boys tried to get as far away from him as possible
without attracting his attention.
Subway Slim, Mike's occasional partner, came in and
ordered a beer. He was tall and bony, and his ugly face
had a curiously inanimate look, as if made out of wood.
Whitey slapped him on the back and I heard Slim say,
"For Christ's sake, Whitey." There was more interchange I
didn't hear. Somewhere along the line Whitey must have
got his knife back from the bartender. He got behind Slim
and suddenly pushed his hand against Slim's back. Slim fell
forward against the bar, groaning. I saw Whitey walk to
the front of the bar and look around. He closed his knife
and slipped it into his packet.
Roy said, "Let's go."
Whitey had disappeared and the bar was empty except
for Mike, who was holding Slim up on one side. Frankie
Dolan was on the other.
1 heard next day from Frankie that Slim was okay.
"The croaker at the hospital said the knife just missed a
kidney."
Roy said, "The big slob. I can see a real muscle man,
but a guy like that going around picking up dimes and
quarters off the bar. I was ready for him. I was going to
kick him in the belly first, then get one of those quart beer
bottles from the case on the floor and break it over his
sconce. With a big villain like that you've got to use
strategy."
We were all barred from the Angle, which shortly
afterwards changed its name to the Roxy Grill.
One night I went to the Henry Street address to look
up Jack. A tall, red-haired girl met me at the door.
"I'm Mary," she said. "Come in."
It seemed that Jack was in Washington on business.
"Come on into the front room," she said, pushing
aside a red corduroy curtain. "I talk to landlords and bill
collectors in the kitchen. We live in here."
I looked around. The bric-a-brac had gone. The place
looked like a chop suey joint. There were black and red
lacquered tables scattered around, black curtains covered
the window. A colored wheel had been painted on the
ceiling with little squares and triangles of different colors
giving a mosaic effect.
"Jack did that," Mary said, painting to the wheel.
"You should have seen him. He stretched a board between
two ladders and lay down on it. Paint kept dripping into
his face. He gets a kick out of doing things like that. We
get some frantic kicks out of that wheel when we're high.
We lay on our backs and dig the wheel and pretty soon it
begins to spin. The longer you watch it, the faster it spins."
This wheel had the nightmarish vulgarity of Aztec
mosaics, the bloody, vulgar nightmare, the heart throbbing
in the morning sun, the garish pinks and blues of souvenir
ashtrays, postcards and calendars. The walls were painted
black and there was a Chinese character in red lacquer on
one wall.
"We don't know what it means," she said.
"Shirts thirty-one cents," I suggested.
She turned on me her blank, cold smile. She began
talking about Jack. "I'm queer for Jack," she said. "He
works at being a thief just like any job. Used to come
home nights and hand me his gun. `Stash that!' He likes to
work around the house painting and making furniture."
As she talked she moved around the room, throwing
herself from one chair to another, crossing and uncrossing
her legs, adjusting her slip, so as to give me a view of her
anatomy in installments.
She went on to tell me how her days were numbered
by a rare disease. "Only twenty-six cases on record. In a
few years I won't be able to get around at all. You see, my
system can't absorb calcium and the bones are slowly dissolving.
My legs will have to be amputated eventually, then
the arms.
There was something boneless about her, like a deepsea
creature. Her eyes were cold fish eyes that looked at
you through a viscous medium she carried about with her.
I could see those eyes in a shapeless, protoplasmic mass
undulating over the dark sea floor.
"Benzedrine is a good kick," she said. "Three strips of
the paper or about ten tablets. Or take two strips of benny
and two goof balls. They get down there and have a fight.
It's a good drive."
Three young hoodlums from Brooklyn drifted in,
wooden-faced, hands-in-pockets, stylized as a ballet. They
were looking for Jack. He had given them a short count in
some deal. At least, that was the general idea. They conveyed
their meaning less by words than by significant jerks
of the head and by stalking around the apartment and
leaning against the walls. At length, one of them walked to
the door and jerked his head. They filed out.
"Would you like to get high?" Mary asked. "There
may be a roach around here somewhere." She began rummaging
around in drawers and ashtrays. "No, I guess not.
Why don't we go uptown? I know several good connections
we can probably catch about now."
A young man lurched in with some object wrapped in
brown paper under one arm. "Ditch this on your way out,"
he said, putting it down on the table. He staggered into the
bedroom on the other side of the kitchen. When we got
outside I let the wrapping paper fall loose revealing the
coin box of a pay toilet crudely jimmied open.
In Times Square we got into a taxi and began cruising
up and down the side streets, Mary giving directions. Every
now and then she would yell "Stop!" and jump out, her red
hair streaming, and I would see her overhaul some character
and start talking. "The connection was here about ten
minutes ago. This character's holding, but he won't turn
loose of any." Later: "The regular connection is gone for
the night. He lives in the Bronx. But just stop here for a
minute. I may find someone in Kellogg's." Finally: "No
one seems to be anywhere. It's a bit late to score. Let's buy
some benny tubes and go over to Ronnie's. They have
some gone numbers on the box. We can order coffee and
get high on benny."
Ronnie's was a spot near 52nd and Sixth where musicians
came for fried chicken and coffee after one p.m. We
sat down in a booth and ordered coffee. Mary cracked a
benzedrine tube expertly, extracting the folded paper, and
handed me three strips. "Roll it up into a pill and wash it
down with coffee."
The paper gave off a sickening odor of menthol. Several
people sitting nearby sniffed and smiled. I nearly
gagged on the wad of paper, but finally got it down. Mary
selected some gone numbers and beat on the table with the
expression of a masturbating idiot.
I began talking very fast. My mouth was dry and my
spit came out in round white balls -- spitting cotton, it's
called. We were walking around Times Square. Mary
wanted to locate someone with a "piccolo" (victrola). I
was full of expansive, benevolent feelings, and suddenly
wanted to call on people I hadn't seen in months or even
years, people I did not like and who did not like me. We
made a number of unsuccessful attempts to locate the ideal
piccolo-owning host. Somewhere along the line we picked
up Peter and finally decided to go back to the Henry Street
apartment where there was at least a radio.
Peter and Mary and I spent the next thirty hours in
the apartment. From time to time we would make coffee
and swallow more benzedrine. Mary was describing the
techniques she used to get money from the "Johns" who
formed her principal source of revenue.
"Always build a John up. If he has any sort of body
at all say, `Oh, don't ever hurt me.' A John is different
from a sucker. When you're with a sucker you're on the
alert all the time. You give him nothing. A sucker is just to
be taken. But a John is different. You give him what he
pays for. When you're with him you enjoy yourself and
you want him to enjoy himself, too.
"If you want to really bring a man down, light a
cigarette in the middle of intercourse. Of course, I really
don't like men at all sexually. What I really dig is chicks. 1
get a kick out of taking a proud chick and breaking her
spirit, making her see she is just an animal. A chick is
never beautiful after she's been broken. Say, this is sort of a
fireside kick," she said, pointing to the radio which was the
only light in the room.
Her face contorted into an expression of monkey-like
rage as she talked about men who accosted her on the
street. "Sonofabitch!" she snarled. "They can tell when a
woman isn't looking for a pickup. I used to cruise around
with brass knuckles on under my gloves just waiting for
one of those peasants to crack at me."
One day Herman told me about a kilo of first-class
New Orleans weed I could pick up for seventy dollars.
Pushing weed looks good on paper, like fur farming or
raising frogs. At seventy-five cents a stick, seventy sticks to
the ounce, it sounded like money. I was convinced, and
bought the weed.
Herman and I formed a partnership to push the weed.
He located a Lesbian named Marian who lived in the Village
and said she was a poetess. We kept the weed in
Marian's apartment, turned her on for all she could use,
and gave her fifty percent on sales. She knew a lot of tea
heads. Another Lesbian moved in with her, and every time
I went to Marian's apartment, there was this huge redhaired
Lizzie watching me with her cold fish eyes full of
stupid hate.
One day, the red-haired Lizzie opened the door and
stood there, her face dead white and puffy with nembutal
sleep. She shoved the package of weed at me. "Take this
and get out," she said. "You're both mother fuckers." She
was half asleep. Her voice was matter-of-fact as if referring
to actual incest.
I said, "Tell Marian thanks for everything."
She slammed the door. The noise evidently woke her
up. She opened the door again and began screaming with
hysterical rage. We could still hear her out on the street.
Herman contacted other tea heads. They all gave us
static. In practice, pushing weed is a headache. To begin
with, weed is bulky. You need a full suitcase to realize any
money. If the cops start kicking your door in, it's like being
with a bale of alfalfa.
Tea heads are not like junkies. A junky hands you the
money, takes his junk and cuts. But tea heads don't do
things that way. They expect the peddler to light them up
and sit around talking for half an hour to sell two dollars'
worth of weed. If you come right to the point, they say you
are a "bring down." In fact, a peddler should not come
right out and say he is a peddler. No, he just scores for a
few good "cats" and "chicks" because he is viperish.
Everyone knows that he himself is the connection, but it is
bad form to say so. God knows why. To me, tea heads are
unfathomable.
There are a lot of trade secrets in the tea business, and
tea heads guard these supposed secrets with imbecilic slyness.
For example, tea must be cured, or it is green and
rasps the throat. But ask a tea head how to cure weed and
he will give you a sly, stupid look and come-on with some
double-talk. Perhaps weed does affect the brain with constant
use, or maybe tea heads are naturally silly.
The tea I had was green so I put it in a double boiler
and set the boiler in the oven until the tea got the greenishbrown
look it should have. This is the secret of curing tea,
or at least one way to do it.
Tea heads are gregarious, they are sensitive, and they
are paranoiac. If you get to be known as a "drag" or a
"bring down," you can't do business with them. I soon
found out I couldn't get along with these characters and I
was glad to find someone to take the tea off my hands at
cost. I decided right then I would never push any more
tea.
In 1937, weed was placed under the Harrison Narcotics
Act. Narcotics authorities claim it is a habit-forming
drug, that its use is injurious to mind and body, and that it
causes the people who use it to commit crimes. Here are
the facts: Weed is positively not habit-forming. You can
smoke weed for years and you will experience no discomfort
if your supply is suddenly cut off. I have seen tea
heads in jail and none of them showed withdrawal symptoms.
I have smoked weed myself off and on for fifteen
years, and never missed it when I ran out. There is less
habit to weed than there is to tobacco. Weed does not
harm the general health. In fact, most users claim it gives
you an appetite and acts as a tonic to the system. I do not
know of any other agent that gives as definite a boot to the
appetite. I can smoke a stick of tea and enjoy a glass of
California sherry and a hash house meal.
I once kicked a junk habit with weed. The second day
off junk I sat down and ate a full meal. Ordinarily, I can't
eat for eight days after kicking a habit.
Weed does not inspire anyone to commit crimes. I
have never seen anyone get nasty under the influence of
weed. Tea heads are a sociable lot. Too sociable for my
liking. I cannot understand why the people who claim
weed causes crimes do not follow through and demand the
outlawing of alcohol. Every day, crimes are committed by
drunks who would not have committed the crime sober.
There has been a lot said about the aphrodisiac effect
of weed. For some reason, scientists dislike to admit that
there is such a thing as an aphrodisiac, so most pharmacologists
say there is "no evidence to support the popular
idea that weed possesses aphrodisiac properties." I can say
definitely that weed is an aphrodisiac and that sex is more
enjoyable under the influence of weed than without it.
Anyone who has used good weed will verify this statement.
You hear that people go insane from using weed.
There is, in fact, a form of insanity caused by excessive use
of weed. The condition is characterized by ideas of reference.
The weed available in the U.S. is evidently not strong
enough to blow your top on and weed psychosis is rare in
the States. In the Near East, it is said to be common. Weed
psychosis corresponds more or less to delirium tremens and
quickly disappears when the drug is withdrawn. Someone
who smokes a few cigarettes a day is no more likely to go
insane than a man who takes a few cocktails before dinner
is likely to come down with the D.T.'s.
One thing about weed. A man under the influence of
weed is completely unfit to drive a car. Weed disturbs your
sense of time and consequently your sense of spatial relations.
Once, in New Orleans, I had to pull over to the side
of a road and wait until the weed wore off. I could not tell
how far away anything was or when to turn or put on the
brakes for an intersection.
I was shooting every day now. Herman had moved
into my apartment on Henry Street, since there was no one
left to pay the rent for the apartment he had shared with
Jack and Mary. Jack had taken a fall on a safe job and was
in the Bronx County jail awaiting trial. Mary had gone to
Florida with a "John." It would not have occurred to
Herman to pay the rent himself. He had lived in other
people's apartments all his life.
Roy was giving himself a long shore leave. He located
a doctor in Brooklyn who was a writing fool. This croaker
would go three scripts a day for as high as thirty tablets a
script. Every now and then he would get dubious on the
deal, but the sight of money always straightened him out.
There are several varieties of writing croakers. Some
will write only if they are convinced you are an addict,
others only if they are convinced you are not. Most addicts
put down a story worn smooth by years of use. Some claim
gallstones or kidney stones. This is the story most generally
used, and a croaker will often get up and open the door as
soon as you mention gallstones. I got better results with
facial neuralgia after I had looked up the symptoms and
committed them to memory. Roy had an operation scar on
his stomach that he used to support his gallstone routine.
There was one oldtime doctor who lived in a Victorian
brownstone in the West Seventies. With him it was
simply necessary to present a gentlemanly front. If you
could get into his inner office you had it made, but he
would write only three prescriptions. Another doctor was
always drunk, and it was a matter of catching him at the
right time. Often he wrote the prescription wrong and you
had to take it back for correction. Then, like as not, he
would say the prescription was a forgery and tear it up.
Still another doctor was senile, and you had to help him
write the script. He would forget what he was doing, put
down the pen and go into a long reminiscence about the
high class of patients he used to have. Especially, he liked
to talk about a man named General Gore who once said to
him, "Doctor, I've been to the Mayo Clinic and you know
more than the whole clinic put together." There was no
stopping him and the exasperated addict was forced to
listen patiently. Often the doctor's wife would rush in at
the last minute and tear up the prescription, or refuse to
verify it when the drugstore called.
Generally speaking, old doctors are more apt to write
than the young ones. Refugee doctors were a good field for
a while, but the addicts burned them down. Often a doctor
will blow his top at the mention of narcotics and threaten
to call the law.
Doctors are so exclusively nurtured on exaggerated
ideas of their position that, generally speaking, a factual
approach is the worst possible. Even though they do not
believe your story, nonetheless they want to hear one. It is
like some Oriental face-saving ritual. One man plays the
high-minded doctor who wouldn't write an unethical script
for a thousand dollars, the other does his best to act like a
legitimate patient. If you say, "Look, Doe, I want an M.S.
script and I'm willing to pay double price for it," the
croaker blows his top and throws you out of the office.
You need a good bedside manner with doctors or you will
get nowhere.
Roy was such a junk hog that Herman and I had to
shoot more than we needed to keep up with him and get
our share. I began shooting in the main line to save stuff
and because the immediate kick was better. We were having
trouble filling the scripts. Most drugstores will only fill
a morphine script once or twice, many not at all. There
was one drugstore that would fill all our scripts anytime,
and we took them all there, though Roy said we ought to
spread them out so they would be harder for the inspector
to find. It was too much trouble to walk around from
drugstore to drugstore, so we usually ended up taking them
to the same place. I was learning to hide my stuff carefully
-- "stash it," as they say in the trade -- so Roy and Herman
couldn't find it and take some.
Taking junk hidden by another junky is known as
making him for his stash." It is difficult to guard against
this form of theft because junkies know where to look for a
stash. Some people carry their junk around with them, but
a man who does that is subject to a charge of possession in
the event of search by the law.
As I began using stuff every day, or often several
times a day, I stopped drinking and going out at night.
When you use junk you don't drink. Seemingly, the body
that has a quantity of junk in its cells will not absorb
alcohol. The liquor stays in the stomach, slowly building
up nausea, discomfort, and dizziness, and there is no kick.
Using junk would be a sure cure for alcoholics. I also
stopped bathing. When von use junk the feel of water on
the skin is unpleasant for some reason, and junkies are
reluctant to take a bath.
A lot of nonsense has been written about the changes
people undergo as they get a habit. All of a sudden the
addict looks in the mirror and does not recognize himself.
The actual changes are difficult to specify and they do not
show up in the mirror. That is, the addict himself has a
special blind, spot as far as the progress of his habit is
concerned. He generally does not realize that he is getting
a habit at all. He says there is no need to get a habit if you
are careful and observe a few rules like shooting every
other day. Actually, he does not observe these rules, but
every extra shot is regarded as exceptional. I have talked to
many addicts and they all say they were surprised when
they discovered they actually had the first habit. Many of
them attributed their symptoms to some other cause.
As a habit takes hold, other interests lose importance
to the user. Life telescopes down to junk, one fix and
looking forward to the next, "stashes" and "scripts,"
"spikes" and "droppers." The addict himself often feels
that he is leading a normal life and that junk is incidental.
He does not realize that he is just going through the motions
in his non-junk activities. It is not until his supply is
cut off that he realizes what junk means to him.
"Why do you need narcotics, Mr. Lee?" is a question
that stupid psychiatrists ask. The answer is, "I need junk to
get out of bed in the morning, to shave and eat breakfast. I
need it to stay alive."
Of course, junkies don't as a rule die from the withdrawal
of junk. But in a very literal sense, kicking a habit
involves the death of junk-dependent cells and their replacement
with cells that do not need junk.
Roy and his old lady moved into the same tenement
building. Every day we would meet in my apartment after
breakfast to plan the day's junk program. One of us would
have to hit the croaker. Roy always tried to put it on
someone else. "I can't go myself this time, 1 had a beef
with him. But listen, I'll tell you just what to say." Or he
would try to get Herman or me to try a new croaker. "You
can't miss. Just don't let him say no, because he will write.
I can't go myself."
I had one of his sure-thing croakers reach for a telephone
on me. I told Roy and he said, "Oh, I guess the
guy's burned. Somebody made him for his bag a few days
ago." After that, I kept away from strange croakers. But
our Brooklyn boy was getting balky.
All croakers pack in sooner or later. One day when
Roy came for his script, the doctor told him, "This is
positively the last, and you guys had better keep out of
sight. The inspector was around to see me yesterday. He
has all the R-xes I wrote for you guys. He told me I'll lose
my license if I write any more, so I'm going to date this
one back. Tell the druggist you were too sick yesterday to
cash it. You guys gave some wrong addresses on those
scripts. That's a violation of Public Health Law 334, so
don't say I didn't warn you. For God's sake, cover up for
me if they question you. This could mean my whole professional
career. You know I've always been right with you
boys. I wanted to stop months ago. I just couldn't leave
you guys stranded. So give me a break. Here's the script
and don't come back."
Roy went back the next day. The doctor's brother-inlaw
was there to protect the family honor. He grabbed Roy
by the coat collar and the back of the belt and threw him
out on the sidewalk.
"The next time I find you around here bothering the
doctor," he said, "you won't be in a condition to walk
away.
Ten minutes later, Herman arrived. The brother-inlaw
was giving him the same treatment when Herman
pulled out a silk dress he had under his coat -- as I recall
somebody unloaded a batch of hot dresses on us for three
grains of morphine -- and turning to the doctor's wife who
had come downstairs to see what all the commotion was
about, he said, "I thought you might like this dress." So he
got a chance to talk to the doctor who wrote one last
script. It took him three hours to fill it. Our regular drugstore
had been warned by the inspector, and they would
not fill any more scripts.
"You guys had better keep out of sight," the proprietor
said. "I think the inspector has warrants out for all of
you.
Our croaker had packed in. We split up to comb the
city. We covered Brooklyn, the Bronx, Queens, Jersey City
and Newark. We couldn't even score for pantopon. It
seemed like the doctors were all expecting us, just waiting
for one of us to walk into the office so they could say,
"Absolutely no." It was as though every doctor in Greater
New York had suddenly taken a pledge never to write
another narcotics script. We were running out of junk.
Patently, we would be immobilized in a matter of hours.
Roy decided to throw in the towel and go to Riker's Island
for the "thirty-day cure." This is not a reduction cure.
They don't give any junk, not even a sleeping tablet. All
they offer the addict is thirty days' detention. The place is
always full.
Herman got picked up in the Bronx while he was
looking for a croaker. No definite charge, just two detectives
didn't like his looks. When they got him downtown
they found out the narcotics squad had a warrant for him
sworn out by the State Inspector. The charge was wrong
address on a narcotics script. Some wagon-chasing lawyer
called me up and asked if I would put up the money to buy
Herman a bond. I sent two dollars for cigarettes instead. If
a man's going to do time, he might as well start doing it.
I was all out of junk at this point and had doubleboiled
my last cottons. Junk is cooked up in a spoon and
sucked into the dropper through a little piece of cotton to
get it all out of the spoon. Some of the solution stays in the
cotton, and addicts save these cottons for emergencies.
I got a codeine script from an old doctor by putting
down a story about migraine headaches. Codeine is better
than nothing and five grains in the skin will keep you from
being sick. For some reason, it is dangerous to shoot codeine
in the vein.
I recall one night when Herman and I were caught
short with nothing but some codeine sulphate. Herman
cooked up first and shot one grain in the vein. Immediately
he turned very red, then very pale. He sat down weakly on
the bed. "My God," he said.
"What's the matter?" I asked. "It's perfectly all right."
He gave me a sour look. "All right, is it? Well, you
shoot some then."
I cooked up a grain and got out my works ready to
take the shot. Herman watched me eagerly. He was still
sitting on the bed. As soon as I took the needle out of my
arm I felt an intense and most unpleasant prickling sensation
entirely different from the prickles you get from a
good shot of morphine. I could feel my face swelling. I sat
down on the bed next to Herman. My fingers were puffed
up double size.
"Well," said Herman, "is it all right?"
"No," I said.
My lips were numb like I'd been hit across the mouth.
I had a terrific headache. I began to pace up and down the
room, since I had a vague theory that if I got the circulation
going the blood would carry away the codeine.
After an hour I felt a little better and went to bed.
Herman told me about a partner of his who passed out and
turned blue after a shot of codeine. "I put him under a
cold shower and he came around."
"Why didn't you tell me that before?" I demanded.
Herman was suddenly and unaccountably irritated.
The sources of his anger were generally unfathomable.
"Well," he began, "you have to expect to take some
chances when you're using junk. Besides, just because one
person has a certain reaction doesn't necessarily mean that
someone else will react in the same way. You seemed so
sure it was all right, I didn't want to bug you by bringing
anything up.
When I heard one day that Herman had been arrested
I figured I would be next, but I was already sick and did
not have the encrgy to leave town.
I was arrested at my apartment by two detectives and
a Federal agent. The State Inspector had sworn out a warrant
charging me with violation of Public Health Law 334
for giving a wrong name on a prescription. The two detectives
were the con-man and tough-guy team. The con-man
was asking me, "How long you been using junk, Bill? You
know you ought to give a right name on those scripts."
Then the tough-guy would break in, "Come on, come on,
we're not boy scouts."
But they were not much interested in the case, and a
statement from me was not necessary. On the way downtown,
the Federal man asked me some questions and filled
out a form for their records. I was taken to the Tombs,
mugged and fingerprinted. While I was waiting to go before
the judge, the con-man gave me a cigarette and began
telling me what a bad deal junk is.
"Even if you get by with it thirty years, you're only
kidding yourself. Now you take these sex degenerates -- "
his eyes glistened -- "the doctors say they can't help themselves."
The judge set bail at a thousand. I was taken back to
the Tombs, ordered to take off my clothes and get under
the shower. An apathetic guard poked through my clothes.
I got dressed again, went up in the elevator, and was assigned
to a cell. At four p.m. we were locked in our cells.
The doors closed automatically from a master switch, with
a tremendous clang that echoed through the cellblock.
The last of the codeine was running out. My nose and
eyes began to run, sweat soaked through my clothes. Hot
and cold flashes hit me as though a furnace door was
swinging open and shut. I lay down on the bunk, too weak
to move. My legs ached and twitched so that any position
was intolerable, and I moved from one side to the other,
slashing about in my sweaty clothes.
A Negro voice was singing, "Get up, get up, woman,
off your big fat rusty-dusty." Voices drift& back and forth.
"Forty years! Man, I can't do no forty years."
At twelve that night, my old lady bailed me out and
met me at the door with some goof balls. Goof balls help a
little.
Next day I was worse and could not get out of bed. So
I stayed in bed taking nembies at intervals.
At night, I would take two strips of benzedrine and go
out to a bar where I sat right by the jukebox. When you're
sick, music is a great help. Once, in Texas, I kicked a habit
on weed, a pint of paregoric and a few Louis Armstrong
records.
Almost worse than the sickness is the depression that
goes with it. One afternoon, I closed my eyes and saw New
York in ruins. Huge centipedes and scorpions crawled in
and out of empty bars and cafeterias and drugstores on
Forty-second Street. Weeds were growing up through
cracks and holes in the pavement. There was no one in
sight.
After five days I began to feel a little better. After
eight days I got the "chucks" and developed a tremendous
appetite for cream puffs and macaroons. In ten days the
sickness had gone. My case had been postponed.
Roy came back from his thirty-day cure on Riker's
Island and introduced me to a peddler who was pushing
Mexican H on 103rd and Broadway. During the early part
of the war, imports of H were virtually cut off and the only
junk available was prescription M. However, lines of
communication reformed and heroin began coming in
from Mexico, where there were poppy fields tended by
Chinese. This Mexican H was brown in color since it had
quite a bit of raw opium in it.
103rd and Broadway looks like any Broadway block.
A cafeteria, a movie, stores. In the middle of Broadway is
an island with some grass and benches placed at intervals.
103rd is a subway stop, a crowded block. This is junk
territory. Junk haunts the cafeteria, roams up and down
the block, sometimes half-crossing Broadway to rest on
one of the island benches. A ghost in daylight on a
crowded street.
You could always find a few junkies sitting in the
cafeteria or standing around outside with coat collars
turned up, spitting on the sidewalk and looking up and
down the street as they waited for the connection. In summer,
they sit on the island benches, huddled like so many
vultures in their dark suits.
The peddler had the face of a withered adolescent. He
was fifty-five but he did not look more than thirty. He was
a small, dark man with a thin Irish face. When he did
show up -- and like many oldtime junkies he was completely
unpunctual -- he would sit at a table in the cafeteria.
You gave him money at the table, and met him around the
corner three minutes later where he would deliver the junk.
He never had it on him, but kept it stashed somewhere
close by.
This man was known as Irish. At one time he had
worked for Dutch Schultz, but big-time racketeers will not
keep junkies on the payroll as they are supposed to be
unreliable. So Irish was out. Now he peddled from time to
time and "worked the hole" (rolling drunks on subways
and in cars) when he couldn't make connections to peddle.
One night, Irish got nailed in the subway for jostling. He
hanged himself in the Tombs.
The job of peddler was a sort of public service that
rotated from one member of the group to the other, the
average term of office being about three months. All agreed
that it was a thankless job. As George the Greek said,
"You end up broke and in jail. Everybody calls you cheap
if you don't give credit; if you do, they take advantage."
George couldn't turn down a man who came to him
sick. People took advantage of his kindness, hitting him for
credit and taking their cash to some other pusher. George
did three years, and when he got out he refused to do any
more pushing.
The hipster-bebop junkies never showed at 103rd
Street. The 103rd Street boys were all oldtimers -- thin, sallow
faces; bitter, twisted mouths; stiff-fingered, stylized
gestures. (There is a junk gesture that marks the junky like
the limp wrist marks the fag: the hand swings out from the
elbow stiff-fingered, palm up.) They were of various nationalities
and physical types, but they all looked alike
somehow. They all looked like junk. There was Irish,
George the Greek, Pantopon Rose, Louie the Bellhop, Eric
the Fag, the Beagle, the Sailor, and Joe the Mex. Several of
them are dead now, others are doing time.
There are no more junkies at 103rd and Broadway
waiting for the connection. The connection has gone
somewhere else. But the feel of junk is still there. It hits
you at the corner, follows you along the block, then falls
away like a discouraged panhandler as you walk on.
Joe the Mex had a thin face with a long, sharp,
twitchy nose and a down-curving, toothless mouth. Joe's
face was lined and ravaged, but not old. Things had happened
to his face, but Joe was not touched. His eves were
bright and young. There was a gentleness about him common
to many oldtime junkies. You could spot Joe blocks
away. In the anonymous city crowd he stood out sharp and
clear, as though you were seeing him through binoculars.
He was a liar, and like most liars, he was constantly changing
his stories, altering time and personnel from one telling
to the next. One time he would tell a story about some
friend, next time he would switch the story around to give
himself the lead. He would sit in the cafeteria over coffee
and pound cake, talking at random about his experiences.
"We know this Chinaman has some stuff stashed, and
we try every way to make him tell us Where it is. We have
him tied to a chair. I light matches" -- he made a gesture of
lighting a match -- "and put them under his feet. He won't
say nothing. I feel so sorry for that man. Then my partner
hit him in the face with his gun and the blood run all down
his face." He put his hands over his face and drew them
down to indicate the flow of blood. "When I see that I turn
sick at my stomach and I say, `Let's get out of here and
leave the man alone. He ain't going to tell us nothing.'"
Louie was a shoplifter who had lost what nerve he
ever had. He wore long, shabby, black overcoats that gave
him all the look of a furtive buzzard. Thief and junky
stuck out all over him. Louie had a hard time making it. I
heard that at one time he had been a stool pigeon, but at
the time I knew him he was generally considered right.
George the Greek did not like Louie and said he was just a
bum. "Don't ever invite him to your home, he'll take advantage.
He'll go on the nod in front of your family. He's
got no class to him."
George the Greek was the admitted arbiter of this set.
He decided who was right and who was wrong. George
prided himself on his integrity. "I never beat nobody."
George was a three-time loser. The next time meant
life as an habitual criminal. His life narrowed down to the
necessity of avoiding any serious involvements. No pushing,
no stealing; he worked from time to time on the docks.
He was hemmed in on every side and there was no way for
him to go but down. When he couldn't get junk -- which
was about half the time -- he drank and took goof balls.
He had two adolescent sons who gave him a lot of
trouble. George was half-sick most of the time in this
period of scarcity, and no match for these young louts. His
face bore the marks of a constant losing fight. The last
time I was in New York I couldn't find George. The 103rd
Street boys are scattered now and no one I talked to knew
what happened to George the Greek.
Fritz the Janitor was a pale thin little man who gave
the impression of being crippled. He was on parole after
doing five years because he scored for a pigeon. The
pigeon
was hard up for someone to turn in, and the narcotics
agent urgently needed to make an arrest. Between them
they built Fritz up to a big-time dope peddler, and smashed
a narcotics ring with his arrest. Fritz was glad to attract so
much attention and he talked complacently about his
"nickel" in Lexington.
The Fag was a brilliantly successful lush-worker. His
scores were fabulous. He was the man who gets to a lush
first, never the man who arrives on the scene when the lush
is lying there with his pockets turned inside out. A sleeping
lush -- known as a "flop" in the trade -- attracts a hierarchy
of scavengers. First come the top lush-workers like the
Fag, guided by a special radar. They only want cash, good
rings, and watches. Then come the punks who will steal
anything. They take the hat, shoes, and belt. Finally,
brazen, clumsy thieves will try to pull the lush's overcoat
or jacket off him.
The Fag was always first on a good lush. One time he
scored for a thousand dollars at the 103rd Street Station.
Often his scores ran into the hundreds. If the lush woke
up, he would simper and feel the man's thigh as though his
intentions were sexual. From this angle he got this moniker.
He always dressed well, usually in tweed sport coats
and gray flannels. A European charm of manner and a
slight Scandinavian accent completed his front. No one
could have looked less like a lush-roller. He always worked
alone. His luck was good and he was determined to avoid
contamination. Sometimes, contact with the lucky can
change a man's run of bad luck, but generally it works out
the other way. Junkies are an envious lot. 103rd Street
envied the Fag his scores. But everyone had to admit he
was a right guy, and always good for a small touch.
The H caps cost three dollars each and you need at
least three a day to get by. I was short, so I began
"working the hole" with Roy. We would ride along, each
looking out one side of the subway car until one of us
spotted a "flop" sleeping on a bench. Then we would get
off the train. I stood in front of the bench with a newspaper
and covered Roy while he went through the lush's
pockets. Roy would whisper instructions to me -- "a little
left, too far, a little back, there, hold it there" -- and I
would move to keep him covered. Often, we were late and
the lush would be lying there with his pockets turned inside
out.
We also worked on the cars. I would sit down next to
the lush and open a newspaper. Roy would reach across
my back and go through the lush's pockets. If the lush
woke up, he could see that I had both hands on the paper.
We averaged about ten dollars a night.
An average night went more or less like this. We
started work about eleven o'clock, getting on the uptown
IRT at Times Square. At 149th Street, I spotted a flop and
we got off. 149th Street is a station with several levels and
dangerous for lush-workers because there are so many
spots where cops can hide, and it is not possible to cover
from every angle. On the lower level the only way out is by
the elevator.
We approached the flop casually, as though we did
not see him. He was middle-aged, sprawled against the
wall, breathing loudly. Roy sat down beside him and I
stationed myself in front of them with an open newspaper.
Roy said, "A little to the right, too far, back a little, there,
that's good."
Suddenly the heavy breathing stopped. I thought of
the scene in the movies where the breathing stops during
the operation. I could feel Roy's immobility behind me.
The drunk muttered something and shifted his position.
Slowly the breathing started again. Roy got up. "Okay"' he
said, and walked rapidly to the other end of the platform.
He took a crumpled mass of bills from his pocket and
counted out eight dollars. He handed me four. "Had it in
his pants pocket. I couldn't find a poke. I thought for a
minute he was going to come up on us."
We started back downtown. At 116th we spotted one
and got off, but the flop got up and walked away before we
could get near him. A shabby man with a wide, loose
mouth accosted Roy and started talking. He was another
lush-worker.
"The Fag scored again," he said. "Two notes and a
wristwatch down at 96th Street." Roy muttered something
and looked at his paper. The man went on talking in a loud
voice. "I had one come up on me. `What are you doing
with your hand in my pocket?' he says."
"For Chris' sake, don't talk like that!" Roy said and
walked away from him. "Fucking wrong bastard," he muttered.
"There aren't many lush-workers around now. Only
the Fag, the Beagle, and that tramp. They all envy the Fag
because he makes good scores. If a sucker comes up on
him he pretends to feel his leg like he was a fag. Those
tramps at 103rd Street go around saying `Goddam Fag'
because they can't score. He's no more a fag than I am."
Roy paused reflectively. "Not as much, in fact."
We rode to the end of the line in Brooklyn without
spotting a single flop. On the way back there was a drunk
asleep in a car. I sat down beside him and opened my
paper. I could feel Roy's arm across my back. Once, the
drunk woke up and looked at me sharply. But both my
bands were clearly visible on the paper. Roy pretended to
be reading the paper with me. The drunk went back to
sleep.
"Here's where we get off," Roy said. "We better go
out on the street for a bit. Doesn't pay to ride too long."
We had a cup of coffee at the 34th Street automat and
split the last take. It was three dollars.
"When you take a lush on the car," Roy was explainfag,
"you got to gauge yourself to the movement of the car.
If you get the right rhythm you can work it out even if the
mooch is awake. I went a little too fast on that one. That's
why he woke up. He felt something was wrong, but he
didn't know what it was."
At Times Square we ran into Subway Mike. He
nodded but did not stop. Mike always worked alone.
"Let's take a run out to Queens Plaza," Roy said.
"That's on the Independent. The Independent has special
cops hired by the company, but they don't carry guns.
Only saps. So if one grabs you, run if you can break
Queens Plaza is another dangerous station where it is
impossible to cover yourself from every angle. You just
have to take a chance. There was a drunk sleeping full
length on a bench, but we couldn't risk taking him because
too many people were around.
"We'll wait a bit," Roy said. "Remember, though,
never pass more than three trains. If you don't get a clear
chance by then, forget it no matter how good it looks."
Two young punks got off a train carrying a lush between
them. They dropped him on a bench, then looked at
Roy and me.
"Let's take him over to the other side," said one of the
punks.
"Why not take him right here?" Roy asked.
The punks pretended riot to understand. "Take him? I
don't get it. What does our queer friend mean?" They
picked up their lush and carried him to the other side of
the platform.
Roy walked over to our mark and pulled a wallet out
of his pocket. "No time for finesse," he remarked. The
wallet was empty. Roy dropped it on the bench.
One of the punks shouted across the tracks, "Take
your hands out of his pockets." And they both laughed.
"Fucking punks," said Roy. "If I catch -one of them
on the West Side line I'll push the little bastard onto the
tracks."
One of the punks came over and asked Roy for a
cut.
"I tell you he didn't have nothing," said Roy.
"We saw you take Out his wallet."
"There wasn't nothing in it."
The train stopped and we got on, leaving the punk
there undecided whether or not to get tough.
"Fucking punks think it's a joke," Roy said. "They
won't last long. They won't think it's so funny when they
get out on the Island doing five-twenty-nine." We were in a
run of bad luck. Roy said, "Well, that's the way it goes.
Some nights you make a hundred dollars. Some nights you
don't make anything."
One night, we got on the subway at Times Square. A
flashily dressed man weaving slightly was walking ahead
of
us. Roy looked him over and said, "That's a good fucking
mooch. Let's see where he goes."
The mooch got on the IRT headed for Brooklyn. We
waited standing up in the space between cars until the
mooch appeared to be sleeping. Then we walked into the
car, and I sat down beside the mooch, opening The New
York Times. The Times was Roy's idea. He said it made
me look like a businessman. The car was almost empty,
and there we were wedged up against the mooch with
twenty feet of empty seats available. Roy began working
over my back. The mooch kept stirring and once he woke
up and looked at me with bleary annoyance. A Negro
sitting opposite us smiled.
"The shine is wise," said Roy in my ear. "He's O.K."
Roy was having trouble finding the poke. The situation
was getting dangerous. I could feel sweat running
down my arms.
"Let's get off," I said.
"No. This is a good mooch. He's sitting on his overcoat
and I can't get into his pocket. When I tell you, fall
up against him, and I'll move the coat at the same time.
Now! . . . For Chris' sake! That wasn't near hard
enough."
"Let's get off," I said again. I could feel fear stirring
in my stomach. "He's going to wake up."
"No. Let's go again. . . . Now! . . . What in hell is
wrong with you? Just let yourself flop against him hard."
"Roy," I said, "For Chris' sake let's get off! He's going
to wake up."
I started to get up, but Roy held me down. Suddenly
he gave me a sharp push, and I fell heavily against the
mooch.
"Got it that time," Roy said.
"The poke?"
"No, I got the coat out of the way."
We were out of the underground now and on the
elevated. I was nauseated with fear, every muscle rigid with
the effort of control. The mooch was only half asleep. I
expected him to jump up and yell at any minute.
Finally I heard Roy say, "I got it."
"Let's go then."
"No, what I got is a loose roll. He's got a poke somewhere
and I'm going to find it. He's got to have a poke."
"I'm getting off."
"No. Wait." I could feel him fumbling across my back
so openly that it seemed incredible that the man could go
on sleeping.
It was the end of the line. Roy stood up. "Cover me,"
he said. I stood in front of him with the paper shielding
him as much as possible from the other passengers. There
were only three left, but they were in different ends of the
car. Roy went through the man's pockets openly and
crudely. "Let's go outside," he said. We went out on the
platform.
The mooch woke up and put his hand in his pocket.
Then he came out on the platform and walked up to Roy.
"All right, Jack," he said. "Give me my money."
Roy shrugged and turned his hands out, palm up.
"What money? What are you talking about?"
"You know Goddamned well what I'm talking about!
You had your hand in my pocket."
Roy held his hands out again in a gesture of puzzlement
and deprecation. "Aw, what are you talking about? I
don't know anything about your money."
"I've seen you on this line every night. This is your
regular route." He turned and pointed to me. "And there's
your partner right there. Now, are you going to give me
my dough?"
"What dough?"
"Okay. Just stay put. We're taking a ride back to town
and this had better be good." Suddenly, the man put both
hands in Roy's coat pockets. "You sonofabitch!" he veiled.
"Give me my dough!"
Roy hit him in the face and knocked him down.
"Why you -- " said Roy, dropping abruptly his conciliatory
and puzzled manner. "Keep your hands off me!"
The conductor, seeing a fight in progress, was holding
up the train so that no one would fall on the tracks.
"Let's cut," I said. We started down the platform. The
man got up and ran after us. He threw his arms around
Roy, holding on stubbornly. Roy couldn't break loose. He
was pretty well winded.
"Get this mooch off me!" Roy yelled.
I hit the man twice in the face. His grip loosened and
he fell to his knees.
"Kick his head off," said Roy.
I kicked the man in the side and felt a rib snap. The
man put his hand to his side. "Help!" he shouted. He did
not try to get up.
"Let's cut," I said. At the far end of the platform, I
heard a police whistle. The man was still lying there on the
platform holding his side and yelling "Help!" at regular
intervals.
There was a slight drizzle of rain falling. When I hit
the street, I slipped and skidded on the wet sidewalk. We
were standing by a closed filling station, looking back at
the elevated.
"Let's go," I said.
"They'll see us."
"We can't stay here.'
We started to walk. I noticed that my mouth was bone
dry. Roy took two goof balls from his shirt pocket.
"Mouth's too dry," he said. "I can't swallow them."
We went on walking.
"There's sure to be an alarm out for us," Roy said.
"Keep a lookout for cars. We'll duck in the bushes if any
come along. They'll be figuring us to get back on the
subway, so the best thing we can do is keep walking."
The drizzle continued. Dogs barked at us as we
walked.
"Remember our story if we get nailed," Roy said. "We
fell asleep and woke up at the end of the line. This guy
accused us of taking his money. We were scared, so we
knocked him down and ran. They'll beat the shit out of
us. You have to expect that."
"Here comes a car," I said. "Yellow lights, too."
We crawled into the bushes at the side of the road and
crouched down behind a signboard. The car drove slowly
by. We started walking again. I was getting sick and wondered
if I would get home to the M. S. I had stashed in my
apartment.
"When we get closer in we better split up," Roy said.
"Out here we might be able to do each other some good. If
we run into a cop on the beat we'll tell him we've been
with some girls and we're looking for the subway. This rain
is a break. The cops will all be in some all-night joint
drinking coffee. For Chris' sake!" he said irritably. "Don't
round like that!"
I had turned around and looked over my shoulder.
"It's natural to turn around," I said.
"Natural for thieves!"
We finally ran into the BMT line and rode back to
Manhattan.
Roy said, "I don't think I'm just speaking for myself
when I say I was scared. Oh. Here's your cut."
He handed me three dollars.
Next day I told him I was through as a lush-worker.
"I don't blame you," he said. "But you got a wrong
impression. You're bound to get some good breaks if you
stick around long enough."
My case came to trial in Special Sessions. I drew a
four-month suspended sentence. After I gave up lush-working
I decided to push junk. There isn't much money in it.
About all a street-peddler addict can expect to do is keep
up His habit. But at least when you are pushing, you have a
good supply of junk on hand and that gives a feeling of
security. Of course, some people do make money pushing.
I knew an Irish pusher who started out capping a 1/16
ounce envelope of H and two years later, when he took a
fall and went away for three years, he had thirty thousand
dollars and an apartment building in Brooklyn.
If you want to push, the first step is to find a wholesale
connection. I did not have a connection, so I formed a
partnership with Bill Gains, who had a pretty fair Italian
connection on the lower East Side. We bought the stuff for
ninety dollars per quarter-ounce, cut it one-third with milk
sugar and put it in one-grain caps. The caps sold for two
dollars each, retail. They ran about ten to sixteen percent
H, which is very high for retail capped stuff. There should
be at least a hundred caps in one-quarter ounce of H
before it is cut. But if the wholesaler is Italian he is almost
sure to give a short count. We usually got about eighty
caps out of these Italian quarter-ounces.
Bill Gains came from a "good family" -- as I recall,
his father had been a bank president somewhere in
Maryland -- and he had front. Gains' routine was stealing
overcoats out of restaurants, and he was perfectly adapted
to this work. The American uppermiddle-class citizen is a
composite of negatives. He is largely delineated by what he
is not. Gains went further. He was not merely negative. He
was positively invisible; a vague respectable presence.
There is a certain kind of ghost that can only materialize
with the aid of a sheet or other piece of cloth to give it
outline. Gains was like that. He materialized in someone
else's overcoat.
Gains had a malicious childlike smile that formed a
shocking contrast to his eyes which were pale blue, lifeless
and old. He smiled, listening down into himself as if attending
to something there that pleased him. Sometimes,
after a shot, he would smile and listen and say slyly, "This
stuff is powerful." With the same smile he would report on
the deterioration and misfortunes of others. "Herman was
a beautiful kid when he first came to New York. The
trouble is, he lost his looks."
Gains was one of the few junkies who really took a
special pleasure in seeing non-users get a habit. Many
junky-pushers are glad to see a new addict for economic
reasons. If you have a commodity you naturally want customers,
provided they are the right kind. But Gains liked to
invite young kids up to his room and give them a shot,
usually compounded of old cottons, and then watch the
effects, smiling his little smile.
Mostly, the kids said it was a good kick, and that was
all. Just another kick like nembies, or bennies, or lush, or
weed. But a few stayed around to get hooked, and Gains
would look at these converts and smile, a prelate of junk.
A little later, you would hear him say, "Really, so-and-so
must realize that I can't carry him any longer." The pledge
was no longer being rushed. It was time for him to pay off.
And pay off for the rest of his life, waiting on street corners
and in cafeterias for the connection, the mediator
between man and junk. Gains was a mere parish priest in
the hierarchy of junk. He would speak of the higher-ups in
a voice of sepulchral awe. "The connections say..
His veins were mostly gone, retreated back to the
bone to escape the probing needle. For a while he used
arteries, which are deeper than veins and harder to hit, and
for this procedure he bought special long needles. He rotated
from his arms and hands to the veins of his feet. A
vein will come back in time. Even so, he had to shoot in
the skin about half the time. But he only gave up and
"skinned" a shot after an agonizing half-hour of probing
and poking and cleaning out the needle, which would clot
up with blood.
One of my first customers was a Village character
named Nick. Nick painted when he did anything. His canvases
were very small and looked as if they had been
concentrated, compressed, misshapen by a tremendous
pressure. "The product of a depraved mind," a narcotics
agent pronounced solemnly, after viewing one of Nick's
pictures.
Nick was always half sick, his large, plaintive brown
eyes watering slightly and his thin nose running. He slept
on couches in the apartments of friends, existing on the
precarious indulgence of neurotic, unstable, stupidly suspicious
individuals who would suddenly throw him out
without reason or warning. For these people he also
scored, hoping that he would receive in return at least the
bead off a cap to take the edge off his constant junk-hunger.
Often, he got nothing but a casual thanks, the purchaser
having convinced himself that Nick had somehow got his
on the other end. As a result, Nick began stealing a small
amount from each cap, loosening up the junk so that it
filled the cap.
There was not much left of Nick. His constant, unsatisfied
hunger had burned out all other concerns. He talked
vaguely about going to Lexington for the cure, or shipping
out in the merchant marine, or buying paregoric in Connecticut
and tapering off on it.
Nick introduced me to Tony, who tended bar in a
Village bar and restaurant. Tony had been pushing and
nearly got nailed when the Federals rushed into his apartment.
He barely had time to throw a 1/16-ounce packet of
H under the piano. The Federals found nothing but his
works and they let him go. Tony was scared and quit
pushing. He was a young Italian who obviously knew his
way around. He looked capable of keeping his mouth shut.
A good type Customer.
I went to Tony's bar every day and ordered a Coca-
Cola. Tony would tell me how many caps he wanted, and I
would go into the phone booth or the W.C. and wrap his
caps up in silver paper. When I got back to my Coke, the
money for the caps was there on the bar like change. I
dropped the caps into an ashtray on the bar and Tony
emptied the ashtray under the bar, taking out his caps.
This routine was necessary because the owner knew Tony
had been a user and had told him to stay off the stuff or get
another job. In fact, the Owner's son was a user -- at this
time in a sanitarium taking the cure. When he got out, he
came straight to rue to buy stuff. He said he couldn't stay
off.
A young Italian hipster named Ray used to come to
this bar every day. He seemed O.K. so I took care of him,
too, dropping his caps in the ashtray with Tony's. This bar
where Tony worked was a small place down several steps
from street level. There was only one door. I always felt
trapped when I went in there. The place gave me such a
feeling of depression and danger that I could hardly bring
myself to go through the door.
After taking care of Tony and Ray, I generally met
Nick in a cafeteria on Sixth Avenue. He always had the
price of a few caps on him. I knew, of course, that he was
Scoring for other people, but I did not know who they
were. I should have known better than to have dealings
with anybody like Nick, who was sick and broke all the
time and therefore liable to pick up anybody's money.
Some people need an intermediary to score for them because
they are strangers in town, or because they have not
been on junk long enough to get acquainted. But the
pusher has reason to be wary of people who send someone
else to score. By and large, the reason a man can't score is
because he is known to be "wrong." So he sends someone
else to score who may not be "wrong" himself, but simply
desperate for junk. To score for a stool pigeon is definitely
not ethical. Often a man goes on from scoring for pigeons
to become a pigeon himself.
I was not in a position to turn money down. I had no
margin. Every day I had to sell enough caps to buy the
next 1/4-ounce, and I was never more than a few dollars
ahead. So I took whatever money Nick had and asked no
questions.
I went into pushing with Bill Gains, who handled the
uptown business. I met Bill in an Eighth Avenue cafeteria
after I finished up in the Village. He had a few good
customers. Izzy, probably his best, had a job as cook on a
tugboat in New York harbor. He was one of the 103rd
Street boys. Izzy had done time for pushing, was known as
a thoroughly right guy, and he had a steady source of
income. This is a perfect customer.
Sometimes Izzy showed up with his partner, Goldie,
who worked on the same boat. Goldie was a thin, hooknosed
man with the skin drawn tight over his face and a
spot of color on each cheekbone. Another of Izzy's friends
was a young exparatrooper named Matty, a husky, handsome,
hard-faced young man who bore none of the marks
of a drug addict. There were also two whores that Bill took
care of. Generally, whores are not a good deal. They attract
heat, and most of them will talk. But Bill insisted that
these particular whores were O.K.
Another of our customers was Old Bart. He took a
few caps every day which he sold on commission. I didn't
know his customers, but I didn't worry about it. Bart was
O.K. If there was a beef, he would take the rap without
talking. Anyway, he had thirty years' experience in junk
and he knew what he was doing.
When I arrived at the cafeteria where we had our
meet, there was Bill sitting at a table, his skinny frame
huddled in someone else's overcoat. Old Bait, shabby and
inconspicuous, was dunking a doughnut in his coffee. Bill
told me he had already taken care of Izzy so I gave Bart
ten caps to sell, and Bill and I took a cab to my apartment.
There we had a shot and checked over the stock, setting
aside ninety dollars for the next 1/4 -ounce.
After Bill got his shot, a little color crept into his face
and he would become almost coy. It was a gruesome sight.
I remember once he told me how he'd been propositioned
by a queer who offered him twenty dollars. Bill declined,
saying, "I don't think you would be very well satisfied."
Bill twitched his fleshless hips. "You should see me in the
nude," he said. "I'm really cute."
One of Bill's most distasteful conversation routines
consisted of detailed bulletins on the state of his bowels.
"Sometimes it gets so I have to reach my fingers in and pull
it out. Hard as porcelain, you understand. The pain is
terrible."
"Listen," I said, "this connection keeps giving us a
short count. I only got eighty caps out of the last batch
after it was cut."
"Well, you can't expect too much. If I could go to a
hospital and get a good enema! But they won't do a thing
for you unless you check into the hospital and, of course, I
can't do that. They keep you at least twenty-four hours. I
told them, `You're supposed to be a hospital. I'm in pain
and I need treatment. Why can't you just call an attendant
and...'"
There was no stopping him. When people start talking
about their bowel movements they are as inexorable as the
processes of which they speak.
Things went on like this for several weeks. One by
one, Nick's contacts located me. They were tired of scoring
through Nick and having him steal the head off their caps.
What a crew! Mooches, fags, four-flushers, stool pigeons,
bums -- unwilling to work, unable to steal, always short of
money, always whining for credit. In the whole lot there
was not one who wouldn't wilt and spill as soon as someone
belted him in the mouth and said "Where did you get
it?"
The worst of the lot was Gene Doolie, a scrawny little
Irishman with a manner between fag and pimp. Gene was
informer to the bone. He probably pulled out dirty lists of
people -- his hands were always dirty -- and read them off
to
the law. You could see him bustling into Black and Tan
headquarters during the Irish Trouble, in a dirty gray toga
turning in Christians, giving information to the Gestapo,
the GPU, sitting in a cafeteria talking to a narcotics agent.
Always the same thin, ratty face, shabby, out-of-date
clothes, whiny, penetrating voice.
The most unbearable thing about Gene was his voice.
It went all through you. This voice was my first knowledge
of his existence. Nick had just arrived at my apartment
with some score money when I was called to the hall
phone by the buzzer.
"I'm Gene Doolie," said the voice. "I'm waiting for
Nick, and I've been waiting a long time." His voice went
up on "long time" to a shrill, grating whine.
I said, "Well, he's here now. I expect you will see him
directly," and I hung up.
Next day, Doolie called me again. "I'm just around
the corner from your place. Do you mind if I come on
over? It's cooler for me to meet you alone."
He hung up before I could say anything, and ten
minutes later he was standing in the door.
When one personality meets another for the first time,
there is a period of mutual examination on the intuitive
level of empathy and identification. But it was impossible
to relate one's self to Doolie in any way. He was simply the
focal point for a hostile intrusive force. You could feel him
walk right into your psyche and look around to see if
anything was there he could make use of. I stepped back a
little from the door to avoid contact with him. He squeezed
himself into the room and immediately sat down on the
couch and lit a cigarette.
"It's better to meet alone like this." His smile was
ambiguously sexual. "Nick is a very un-cool guy." He
stood up and handed me four dollars. "Do you mind if I
take off here?" he asked, pulling off his coat.
I had never heard anyone else use this expression. For
an insane moment I thought he was making advances. He
dropped his coat on the couch and rolled up his sleeve. I
brought him two caps and a glass of water. He had his own
works, for which I was grateful. I watched him as he hit a
vein, pressed the dropper and rolled down his sleeve.
When you are hooked, the effects of a shot are not
dramatic. But the observer who knows what to look for
can see the immediate working of junk in the blood and
cells of another user. But in Doolie I could detect no
change whatever. He put on his coat and picked up the
cigarette which had been smoldering in an ashtray. He
looked at me with his pale blue eyes that seemed to have
no depth at all. They looked artificial.
"Let me tell you something" he said. "You're making
a big mistake to trust Nick. A few nights ago I was in
Thompson's Cafeteria and I ran into Rogers, the agent. He
told me, `I know Nick is scoring for all you Goddamned
junkies here in the Village. You're getting good stuff, too --
between sixteen and twenty percent. Well, you can tell
Nick this: We can take him any time we want, and when
we do catch up to him he's going to work with us. He
opened up for me once. He'll do it again. We're going to
fnd out where this stuff is coming from.' "
Doolie looked at me and sucked on his cigarette.
"When they get Nick, they'll get you. You'd better let Nick
know that if he talks you'll have him poured into a barrel
of concrete and dumped in the East River. I don't need to
tell you any more. You can see what the situation is.
He looked at me, trying to gauge the effect of his
words. It was impossible to tell just how much of this story
I was expected to believe. Perhaps it was just a roundabout
way of saying, "How will you ever know who fingered
you? With Nick such an obvious suspect, if I talked you
could never be sure, could you now?"
"Could you let me have one cap on credit?"he asked.
"What I've just told you should be worth something."
I gave him a cap and he pocketed it without comment.
He stood up. "Well, I'll be seeing you. I'll call at this
same time tomorrow."
I put out a grapevine to see what I could find out
about Doolie, and to check his story. No one knew anything
definite about him. Tony the bartender said, "Doolie
will fink if he has to." But he couldn't give me a definite
instance. Yes, Nick was known to have talked once. But
the facts of this case, in which Doolie was also involved,
indicated the tip could just as well have come from Doolie.
Several days after the Gene Doolie episode, I was
coming out of the subway at Washington Square when a
thin, blond kid walked up to me. "Bill," he said, "I guess
you don't know who I am. I've been scoring off you
through Nick and I'm tired of having him steal the head off
all my caps. Can't you take care of me directly?"
I thought, What the hell? After Gene Doolie, why get
particular? "O.K., kid," I said. "How many do you want?"
He gave me four dollars.
"Let's take a walk," I said, and started toward Sixth
Avenue. I had two caps in my hand and waited for one of
the empty spaces you hit in a city. "Get ready to cop," I
said, and dropped the caps into his hands. I made a meet
with him for the next day in the Washington Square Bickford's.
This blond kid's name was Chris. I heard from Nick
that his folks had money and that he lived on an allowance
from home. When I met him the next day in Bickford's, he
immediately began to give me the let-me-warn-you-about-
Nick routine. "Nick is followed all the time now. You
know yourself when a guy is yenning, he doesn't look
behind him. He's running. So you see who you picked out
to give your address and phone number to."
"I know all about that," I said.
Chris pretended to be hurt. "Well, I hope you know
what you're doing. Now listen, this is not a routine. I'm
positively getting a check from my aunt this afternoon.
Look at this."
He pulled a telegram horn his pocket. I glanced at it.
There was some vague reference to a check. He went on
explaining about the check. As he talked, he kept putting
his hand on my arm and gazing earnestly into my face. I
felt I could not stand any more of this sweet con. To Cut
him short, I handed him one cap before he could put it on
me for two or three.
Next day he showed up with a dollar-eighty. He didn't
say anything about the check. And so it went. He came up
short, or not at all. He was always about to get money
from his aunt, or mother-in-law, or somebody. These stories
he documented with letters and telegrams. He got to be
almost as much of a drag as Gene Doolie.
Another prize customer was Marvin, part-time waiter
in a Village nightclub. He was always unshaved and dirtylooking.
He had only one shirt, which he washed every
week or so and dried out on the radiator. The final touch
was that he wore no socks. I used to deliver stuff to his
room, a dirty, furnished room in a red brick house on Jane
Street. I figured it was better to deliver to his place than to
meet him anywhere else.
Some people are allergic to junk. One time I delivered
a cap to Marvin and he took a shot. I was looking out the'
window -- it is nerve-racking to watch someone probe for a
vein -- and when I turned around I noticed his dropper was
full of blood. He had passed out and the blood had run
back into the dropper. I called to Nick and he pulled the
needle out and slapped Marvin with a wet towel. He came
around partly and muttered something.
"I guess he's O.K.," I said. "Let's cut."
He looked like a corpse slumped there on the dirty.
unmade bed, his limp arm stretched out, a drop of blood
slowly gathering at the elbow.
As we walked downstairs, Nick told me that Marvin
had been after him for my address.
"Listen," I said,, "if you give it to him, you can find
yourself a new connection. One thing I don't need is somebody
dying in my apartment."
Nick looked hurt. "Of course I won't give him your
address."
"What about Doolie?"
"I don't know how he got the address. I swear I
don't."
Along with these bums, I picked up a couple of good
customers. One day, I ran into Bert, a character I knew
from the Angle Bar. Bert was known as a muscle man. He
was a heavy-set, round-faced, deceptively soft-looking
young man who specialized in strong-arm routines and
"shakes." I never knew him to use anything but weed, and
I was surprised when he asked me if I was holding any
junk. I told him, yes, I was pushing junk, and he bought
ten caps. I found out he had been hooked for about six
months.
Through Bert, I met another customer. This was
Louis, a very handsome type with a waxy complexion,
delicate features, and a silky black mustache. He looked
like an 1890 portrait. Louis was a pretty fair thief and was
generally well-heeled. When he asked for credit, which
was seldom, he always made good the next day. Sometimes
he brought around a watch, or a suit, instead of cash,
which was all right with me. I picked up a fifty-dollar
watch from him for five caps.
Pushing junk is a constant strain on the nerves.
Sooner or later you get the "copper jitters," and everybody
looks like a cop. People moving about in the subway seem
to be edging closer so they can grab you before you have a
chance to throw away the junk.
Doolie came around every day, impudent, demanding,
insufferable. Usually he had some new bulletin on the Nick-
Rogers situation. He didn't mind letting me know that he
was in constant touch with Rogers.
"Rogers is shrewd, but he's corny," Doolie told me.
"He keeps saying, `I don't care about you damned junkies.
I'm after the guys who make money out of it. When we
find Nick, he's going to fink. He opened up for me once.
He'll do it again.'"
Chris kept hounding me for credit, whining and pawing
at me and talking about the money he was going to
have for sure in a few days, or a few hours.
Nick looked harried and desperate. I guess he didn't
waste any money on food. He looked like the terminal
stages of some wasting disease.
When I delivered to Marvin, I left before he took his
shot. I knew he would die from junk sooner or later and I
didn't want to be around when it happened.
On top of all this, I was just barely scraping by. The
short counts we kept getting from the wholesaler, the constant
nibbles of credit, and customers coming up twentyfive,
fifty, or even a dollar short, plus my own habit, cut
profits to bare subsistence.
When I complained about the wholesaler, Bill Gains
got snappish and said I ought to cut the stuff more.
"You're giving a better cap than anybody in New York
City. Nobody sells sixteen percent stuff on the street. If
your customers don't like it, they can take their business to
Walgreen's."
We kept moving our uptown meets from one cafeteria
to another. It doesn't take the manager long to spot a
bookie or a junk pusher. There were about six regular
uptown customers now, and that means quite a bit of
traffic. So we kept moving.
Tony's bar still gave me the horrors. One day it was
raining very hard, and I was on my way to Tony's about a
half hour late. Ray, the young Italian hipster, stuck his
head out of the door of a restaurant and called me over. It
was a lunch counter with booths along one wall. We sat
down at a booth and I ordered tea.
"There's an agent outside in a white trenchcoat," Ray
told me. "He followed me over here from Tony's and I'm
afraid to go out."
The table was made of tube metal, and Ray showed
me, guiding my hand under the table, where there was an
open end to one of the tubes. I sold him two caps. He
wrapped them in a paper napkin and stuffed the napkin
into the tube,
"I'm going out clean first in case I get a shake," he
said.
I drank my cup of tea, thanked him for the information,
and left ahead of him. I had the stuff in a package of
cigarettes and was ready to throw it in the water-filled
gutter. Sure enough, there was a burly young man in a
white trenchcoat standing in a doorway. When he saw me
he started sauntering up the street ahead of me. Then he
turned a corner, waiting for me to walk past so he could
fall in behind. I turned and ran back in the opposite direction.
When I reached Sixth Avenue, he was about fifty feet
behind me. I vaulted the subway turnstile and shoved the
cigarette package into the space at the side of a gum machine.
I ran down one level and got a train up to the
Square.
Bill Gains was sitting at a table in the cafeteria. He
was wearing one stolen overcoat, and another lay on his
lap. He looked sly and satisfied. Old Bart was there and an
unemployed cab driver named Kelly, who hung around
42nd Street and sometimes picked up a few dollars peddling
condoms and with a routine of hitting commuters for
fifty cents, which is one variety of the "short con." I told
them about the agent, and Old Bait went down to pick up
the stuff.
Gains looked annoyed and said pettishly, "For God's
sake, watch whose money you pick up."
"If I hadn't picked up Ray's money, I'd be on my way
to the Federal building."
"Well, be careful."
We waited around for Bait, and Kelly began telling a
long story about how he told off a guard in the Tombs.
Bait was back soon with the stuff. He reported that a
guy with a white trenchcoat was still walking around on
the station platform. I gave Bait two caps under the table.
Gains and I walked over to his room to take a shot.
"Really," he said, "I'm going to have to tell Bait I can't
carry him any longer." Gains lived in a cheap rooming
house in the West Forties. He opened the door to his room.
"You wait here," he said. "I'm going to get my works."
Like most junkies, he kept his "works" and caps stashed
somewhere outside his room. He came back with the works
and we both took a shot.
Gains was aware of his talent for invisibility, and at
times he felt the need for holding himself together so he
would at least have enough flesh to put a needle in. At
these times he would assemble all his claims to reality.
Now he began rummaging around in the bureau and
brought out a worn manila envelope. He showed me a
discharge from Annapolis "for the good of the service," an
old, dirty letter from "my friend, the captain," a card to
the Masons and a card to the Knights of Columbus.
"Every little bit helps," he said, indicating these
credentials. He sat for a few minutes, silent and reflective.
Then he smiled. "Just a victim of circumstances," he said.
He stood up and carefully put away his envelope. "I've
about burned down all the pawnshops in New York. You
don't mind pawning these coats for me, do you?"
After that, things got worse and worse. One day, the
hotel clerk stopped me in the lobby. "I don't know how to
say this," he said, "but there's something wrong about the
people who come up to your room. I used to be in illegitimate
business myself years ago. I just wanted to warn you
to be careful. You know, all calls come through the office.
I heard one this morning and it was pretty obvious. If
someone else had been at the switchboard . . . So be
careful and tell these people to watch what they say over
the phone."
The call he referred to was Doolie's. That morning he
had called me up. "I want to see you," he yelled. "I'm sick.
I'll be over right away."
I could feel the Federals moving steadily closer. It was
a question of time. I did not trust any of the Village customers,
and I was convinced that at least one of them was
a rank stool pigeon. Doolie was my number one suspect,
with Nick running a very close second, and Chris trailing
in third place. Of course, there was always the possibility
that Marvin might take the easy way of raising money to
buy a pair of socks.
Nick also scored for some respectable working people
in the Village who indulged in an occasional "joy bang."
This type person is a bad security risk because of timidity.
They are afraid of the police, they are afraid of losing their
responsible jobs. It does not occur to them that there is
anything wrong about giving information to the law. Of
course, they will not come forward with information because
of their fear of being "involved." But they will generally
spill under police questioning.
Narcotics agents operate largely with the aid of informers.
The usual routine is to grab someone with junk
on him, and let him stew in jail until he is good and sick.
Then comes the spiel:
"We can get you five years for possession. On the
other hand, you can walk out of here right new. The
decision is up to you. If you work with us, we can give you
a good deal. For one thing, you'll have plenty of junk and
pocket money. That is, if you deliver. Take a few minutes
to think it over."
The agent takes out a few caps and puts them on the
table. This is like pouring a glass of ice water in front of a
man dying of thirst. "Why don't you pick them up? Now
you're being sensible. The first man we want to get is -- "
Some of them don't need to be pressured. Junk and
pocket money is all they want, and they don't care how
they get it. The new pigeon is given marked money and
sent out to make a buy. When the pigeon makes a buy with
this money, the agents close in right away to make the
arrest. It is essential to make the arrest before the peddler
has a chance to change the marked money. The agents
have the marked money that bought the junk, and the junk
it bought. If the case is important enough, the pigeon may
be called upon to testify. Of course, once he appears in
court and testifies, the pigeon is known to the trade and no
one will serve him. Unless the agents want to send him to
another town (some especially able pigeons go on tour),
his informing career is finished.
Sooner or later, the peddlers get wise to a pigeon and
the pigeon can't score. When this happens, his usefulness
to the agents is at an end, and they usually turn him in.
Often he ends up doing more time than anybody he sent
up.
In the case of young kids who would be no use as fulltime
pigeons, the procedure is different. The agent may
come on with the old cop con: "I hate to send a young kid
like you away. Sure you made a mistake. That can happen
to anybody. Now listen. I'm going to give you a break, but
you'll have to cooperate with us. Otherwise I won't be able
to help you." Or else they just belt him in the mouth and
say, "Where did you get it?" With lots of people that's all
it takes. You could find an example of every type informer,
overt or potential, among my customers.
After the hotel clerk spoke to me, I moved to another
hotel and registered under another name. I stopped going
to the Village and shifted all the Village customers to uptown
meets.
When I told Gains what the hotel clerk said to me and
how lucky we were he happened to be a right guy, he said,
"We've got to pack in. We can't last with this crowd."
"Well," I said, "they're up there now, waiting for us in
front of the automat. The whole lot of them. Shall we go
today?"
"Yes. I'm going to Lexington for the cure and I need
bus fare. I'm leaving tonight."
As soon as we got in sight of the meet, Doolie broke
from the others and ran up to us at full speed, pulling off a
two-tone sports jacket. He was wearing some sort of sandals,
or slippers.
"Give me four caps for this coat," he said. "I've been
in the can twenty-four hours."
Doolie sick was an unnerving sight. The envelope of
personality was gone, dissolved by his junk-hungry cells.
Viscera and cells, galvanized into a loathsome insect-like
activity, seemed on the point of breaking through the surface.
His face was blurred, unrecognizable, at the same
time shrunken and tumescent.
Gains gave Doolie two caps and took the coat.
"I'll give you two more tonight," he said. "Right here
at nine o'clock."
Izzy, who'd been standing by, silent, had been looking
at Doolie with disgust. "Holy Jesus!" he said. "Sandals!"
The others swarmed around, holding out their hands
like a crowd of Asiatic beggars. None of them had any
money.
I said, "No credit," and we started walking down the
street. They followed us, whining and clutching at our
sleeves. "Just one cap."
I said no and kept on walking. One after the other,
they fell away. We walked down into the subway and told
Izzy we were packing in.
"Jeez," he said, "I don't blame you. Sandals!"
Izzy bought six caps and we gave two caps to Old
Dart, who was going out to Riker's for the thirty-day cure.
Bill Gains was examining the sports coat with a practiced
eye. "It should bring ten dollars easy," he said. "I
know a tailor who will sew up this rip for me." One pocket
Was slightly torn. "Where did he get it?"
"He claims from Brooks Brothers. But he's the kind
of guy who would say anything he stole came from Brooks
Brothers or Abercrombie & Fitch."
"It's too bad," said Gains, smiling. "My bus leaves at
six. I won't be able to give him the other two caps I
promised."
"Don't worry about it. He's into us for a double
sawski."
"He is? Well, then, it doesn't make any difference."
Bill Gains left for Lexington, and I started for Texas
in my car. I had 1/16-ounce of junk with me. I figured this
was enough to taper off, and I had a reduction schedule
carefully worked out. It was supposed to take twelve days.
1 had the junk in solution, and in another bottle distilled
water. Every time I took a dropper of solution out to use
It, I put the same amount of distilled water in the junk
solution bottle. Eventually I would be shooting plain water.
This method is well known to all junkies. A variation of it
is known as the Chinese cure, which is carried out with
hop and Wampole's Tonic. After a few weeks, you find
yourself drinking plain Wampole's Tonic.
Four days later in Cincinnati, I was out of junk and
immobilized. I have never known one of these self-administered
reduction cures to work. You find reasons to make
each shot an exception that calls for a little extra junk.
Finally, the junk is all gone and you still have your habit.
I left the car in storage and took a train to Lexington.
I did not have the papers that are required for admittance,
but I was relying on my Army discharge to get me in.
When I got to Lexington I took a taxi out to the hospital,
several miles from the town. We reached the gate-house of
the hospital. In the gate-house was an old Irish guard. He
looked at my Army discharge.
"Are you addicted to the use of habit-forming drugs?"
I said yes.
"Well, sit down." He pointed to a bench.
He called the main building. "No, no papers. . . . Got
an Army discharge." He looked over from the phone.
"You ever been here before?" he asked.
I said no.
"Says he hasn't been here before." The guard hung
up. "A car will be down for you in a few minutes," he told
me. "Have you got any drugs or needles or droppers on
your person? You can surrender them here, but if you take
them up to the main building you are liable to prosecution
for introducing contraband articles into a Government
reservation."
"I've got nothing."
After a short wait, a car came down to the gate and
drove me up to the main building. A heavy, barred, iron
door opened automatically to let the car in, then closed
after it. A polite guard took my addiction history.
"You're doing a sensible thing to come here," he told
me. "There's one man in here now who's spent every
Christmas for the past twenty-five years locked up somewhere."
I checked my clothes into a basket and took a shower.
The next step was a physical examination. I had to wait
about fifteen minutes for the doctor. The doctor apologized
for keeping me waiting, gave me a physical examination
and took my addiction history. His manner was courteous
and efficient. He listened to my addiction history, interrupting
with an occasional comment or question. When I mentioned
buying junk by the 1/4-ounce, he smiled and said,
"Selling some of it to keep up the habit, eh?"
Finally he leaned back in his chair. "As you know,"
he said, "you can leave here on twenty-four hours' notice.
Some people leave after ten days, and stay off permanently.
Some stay six months and go back two days after they get
out. But, statistically speaking, the longer you stay the
better chance you have of staying off. The procedure here
is more or less impersonal. The cure lasts about eight or
ten days, depending on severity of addiction. You can put
on that dressing gown now."
He pointed to pajamas and dressing gown and slippers
that were laid out for me. The doctor was speaking rapidly
into a dictaphone. He gave a brief account of my physical
condition and addiction history. "Patient seems secure and
states his reason for seeking cure is necessity of providing
for his family."
A guard took me to my ward.
"If you want to get off drugs," he said, "this is the
place to do it."
The ward attendant asked me if I really wanted to get
off drugs. I said yes. He assigned me to a private room.
About fifteen minutes later the attendant called, "Shot
line!" Everyone in the ward lined up. As our names were
called, we put an arm through a window in the door of the
ward dispensary, and the attendant gave the shots. Sick as I
was, the shot fixed me. Right away, I began to get hungry.
I walked up to the middle of the ward, where there
were benches, chairs and a radio, and got in conversation
with a thuggish-looking young Italian. He asked me if I
had much of a record. I said no.
"You ought to be up with the Do-Rights," he said.
"You get a longer cure there and better rooms.
The Do-Rights were people in Lexington for the first
time, who were considered to be especially good prospects
for a permanent cure. Evidently, the doctor in Reception
didn't think too much of my prospects.
Others drifted out and joined the conversation. The
shot had made them feel sociable. First came a Negro from
Ohio.
"How much time you bringing with you?" the Italian
asked him.
"Three years," the Negro said. He was in for forging
and selling scripts. He began telling about a stretch he did
in Ohio State. "That's a fuck of a place to do time. A
bunch of kids in there, rough little bastards. You get your
stuff at the commissary and some punk comes up to you
and says, `Give it to me.' If you don't give it to him, he
belts you one in the kisser. Then they all gang up on you.
You ain't going to whip all of them."
A gambling-house dealer from East St. Louis was describing
a method for cooking the carbolic acid out of a
phenol, sweet oil and tincture of opium script.
"I tell the croaker I've got an aged mother and she
uses this prescription for piles. After you get the sweet oil
drained off, you put the stuff in a tablespoon and hold it
over a gas flame. That burns the phenol right out. It'll hold
you twenty-four hours."
A handsome, powerfully built man of forty or so,
with a tan complexion and iron-gray hair, was telling how
his girl smuggled stuff to him in an orange. "So there we
were in County. Goddamn both of us shitting in our pants
like a goose. Hell, when I bit into that orange it was so
bitter. Must have been fifteen or twenty grains in it, shot in
with a hypo. I didn't know she had that much sense."
"The guard says to me, `Drug addict! Why you sonofabitch,
you mean you're a dope fiend! Well, you'll get no
medicine in here!'
"Sweet oil and tincture. The oil floats to the top and
you can draw it off with a dropper. Cooks up black as
tar."
"So I hit Philly sick as a sonofabitch."
"Well, the croaker says `Okay, how much do you
use?'
"Ever use powdered Dilaudid? Lots of guys killed
themselves with it. About as much as you can put on the
end of a toothpick. The big end, that is, no more."
"Cook it up and shoot it."
"On the nod.''
"Loaded."
"That was back in `33. Twenty-eight dollars an
ounce.
"We used to make a pipe out of a bottle and a rubber
tube. When we got through smoking, we'd break the bottie."
"Cook it up and shoot it."
"On the nod."
"Sure you can shoot cocaine in the skin. It hits you
right in the stomach.''
"H and coke. You can smell it going in."
Like hungry men who can talk about nothing but
food. After a while the shot began to wear off. Conversation
slackened. People drifted off to lie down, read or play
cards. Lunch was served in the ward room and was an
excellent meal.
There were three shots a day. One at seven a.m., when
we got up, one at one p.m., and one at nine p.m. Two old
acquaintances had come in during the afternoon, Matty
and Louis. I ran into Louis as we were lining up for the
evening shot.
"Did they get you?" he asked me.
"No. Just here for the cure. How about you?"
"Same with me," he answered.
With the evening shot, they gave me some chloral
hydrate in a glass. Five new arrivals were brought to the
ward during the night. The ward attendant threw up his
hands. "I don't know where I'm going to put them. I've got
thirty-one dope fiends in here now."
Among the new arrivals was a dignified, white-haired
man of seventy named Bob Riordan, an old-time con man,
junk pusher, and pickpocket. He looked the way bankers
looked around 1910. He had come with two friends in a
car. On the way to Lexington, they had called the Surgeon
General in Washington and asked him to wire ahead to the
gate that they were coming and should be let right in. They
referred to the Surgeon General as Felix and seemed to
know him from way back. But only Riordan got in that
night. The other two drove to a town near Lexington,
where they knew a croaker, to get fixed before they were
immobilized for lack of junk.
They both came in about noon the next day. Sal
Bloom was a fat man with a heavy Jewish face. Con man
stuck out all over him. With him was a little thin man
called Bunky. Bunky might have been an old farmer or any
dried-up skinny old man except for his gray eyes, serene
and cold behind steel-rimmed spectacles. These were
Riordan's two friends. All of them had done a lot of time,
mostly Federal time for pushing junk. They were affable,
but maintained a certain reserve. The story they put down
was that they really wanted to get off junk because the
Federals bothered them all the time.
As Sal said, "Hell, I love junk and I can get a room
full of it. But if I can't use without I get static all the time
from the law, I'll get off junk and stay off." He went on
talking about some old acquaintances who got their start in
junk and later turned respectable. "Now they say, `Don't
have anything to do with Sal. He's a shmecker.'"
I don't think they expected anyone to believe the
getting-off-junk routine. It was just a way of saying, "Why
we came here is our own business."
Another new arrival was Abe Green, a long-nosed
Jew with one leg. He was almost a ringer for Jimmy
Durante. He had pale blue birdlike eyes. Even junk-sick,
he radiated a fierce vitality. His first night in the ward, he
was so sick a doctor came down to examine him and gave
him an extra %-grain of morphine. In a few days he was
stumping around the ward, talking and playing cards.
Green was a well-known pusher from Brooklyn, one of the
few independent operators in the business. Most pushers
have to work for the syndicate or quit, but Green had so
many connections he could stay in business on his own. At
the time, he was out on bail, but expected to beat the rap
on the grounds of illegal seizure. "He (the agent) wakes
me up in the middle of the night and starts beating me over
the head with his gun. Wants me to give him my connection.
I told him, `I'm fifty-four years old and I've never
given you guys anything yet. I'll be dead first.'"
Telling about a stretch in Atlanta, where he kicked a
habit cold: "Fourteen days I was beating my head against
the wall and blood came out of my eyes and nose. When
the screw came, I'd spit in his face." Coming from him,
these narratives had an epic quality.
Benny was another oldtime Jewish shmecker from
New York. He had been in Lexington eleven times and was
in on the Blue Grass this trip. According to the Blue Grass
Law of Kentucky, any "known user of narcotic drugs can
be sentenced to the county jail for one year, with the
alternative of taking the cure in Lexington." He was a
short, fat, little Jew with a round face. I would never have
made Benny for junk. He had a fair singing voice in a loud
way, and his best number was "April Showers."
One day Benny came into the day-room all excited.
"Moishe just checked in," he said. "He's a panhandler
and a fruit. A disgrace to the Jewish race."
"But, Benny," someone said, "he's got a wife and
kids."
"1 don't care if he's got ten kids." Benny said. "He's
still a fruit."
Moishe showed about an hour later. He was a pretty
obvious fruit and strictly on the mooch. He was a man of
about sixty, with a smooth, pink face and white hair.
Matty was all over the ward, talking to everybody.
asking crude, blunt questions, describing his withdrawal
symptoms in detail. He never complained. I don't think he
was capable of self-pity. Bob Riordan asked him what he
did to get by and Matty replied, "I'm just a dumb fucking
thief." He told a story about a drunk asleep on a subway
platform bench. "I knew he had a roll in his side pocket,
but every time I got within ten feet of him, he'd wake up
and say, `What do you want?'" It was easy to see how
Matty's vigorous, intrusive emanations would wake up the
lush. "So I went and found a guy I knew. Some old goofball
bum. He sat right down by the drunk, and in twenty
seconds he had it. He cut the pocket."
"Why didn't you shove him back against the wall and
take the money?" said Riordan in his good-natured, condescending
way.
Matty had unlimited brass and there was no uncertainty
behind it. He looked completely unlike a drug addict.
If a drugstore refused to sell him a needle, he would
say, "Why won't you sell it to me? Do I look like a dope
fiend?" A doctor had got Matty on stuff. "The Jew bastard,"
Matty said, "he used to say to me, `Matty, you need
a little shot. There's no color.' But I made him wish he'd
never seen me.
I could see a fat old Jewish doctor trying to refuse
Matty a shot on credit. Characters like Matty constitute
one of the hazards of pushing. They usually have money.
When they don't, they expect credit. If you refuse, they
will try to strong-arm you. They won't listen to no when
they want junk.
The cure at Lexington is not designed to keep the
addicts comfortable. It starts at one-quarter of a grain of
M three times a day and lasts eight days -- the preparation
now used is a synthetic morphine called dolophine. After
eight days. you get a send-off shot and go over in "population."
There you receive barbiturates for three nights and
that is the end of medication.
For a man with a heavy habit, this is a very rough
schedule. I was lucky, in that I came in sick, so the
amount given in the cure was sufficient to fix me. The
sicker you are and the longer you have been without junk,
the smaller the amount necessary to fix you.
When the time came for my send-off shot, I was assigned
to Ward B -- "Skid Row," it was called. There was
nothing wrong with the accommodations, but the inmates
were a sorry-looking lot. In my section, there were a bunch
of old bums with the spit running out of their mouths.
You are allowed seven days to rest in population after
medication stops. Then you have to choose a job and go to
work. Lexington has a complete farm and dairy. There is a
cannery to put up the fruits and vegetables raised on the
farm. The inmates run a dental laboratory where they
make false teeth, a radio repair service, a library. They
serve as janitors, they cook and serve food, and they act as
assistants to the ward attendants. So there is a wide variety
of jobs to select from.
I did not figure to stay around long enough to work.
After my send-off shot began to wear off, I got sick. Just a
shadow of the way I felt when I came in, but bad enough.
Even with the sedative, I did not sleep that night. Next day
I was worse. I couldn't eat anything, and it was an effort
for me to move around. The dolophine suspends the sickness,
but when medication stops the sickness returns. "You
don't kick your habit in the shooting gallery," an inmate
told me. "You kick it over here in population." `When the
night medication stopped, I checked out still sick. On a
cold windy afternoon, five of us took a cab into Lexington.
"The thing to do is get right out of Lexington," my
companions told me. "Co right to the bus station and stay
there until your bus leaves. Otherwise you're liable to get
the Blue Grass." The law was devised, among other things,
to protect the doctors and druggists of Kentucky against
the importunities of addicts on their way to and from the
Lexington Narcotics Farm. It is also intended to discourage
addicts from lingering in the town of Lexington.
In Cincinnati, I went around to several drugstores
buying one-ounce bottles of paregoric. Two ounces of
paregoric will fix an addict when his habit is reduced, as
mine was at that time. I drank three ounces of the paregoric,
followed with a little warm water. In about ten
minutes I could feel the junk take hold, and the sickness
was gone. I felt hungry right away and went out of the
hotel to eat.
Eventually, I got to Texas and stayed off junk for
about four months. Then I went to New Orleans. New
Orleans presents a stratified series of ruins. Along Bourbon
Street are ruins of the 1920s. Down where the French
Quarter blends into Skid Row are ruins of an earlier
stratum: chili joints, decaying hotels, oldtime saloons with
mahogany bars, spittoons, and crystal chandeliers. The
ruins of 1900.
There are people in New Orleans who have never
been outside the city limits. The New Orleans accent is
exactly similar to the accent of Brooklyn. The French
Quarter is always crowded. Tourists, servicemen, merchant
seamen, gamblers, perverts, drifters, and lamsters from
every State in the Union. People wander around, unrelated,
purposeless, most of them looking vaguely sullen and hostile.
This is a place where you enjoy yourself. Even the
criminals have come here to cool off and relax.
But a complex pattern of tensions, like the electrical
mazes devised by psychologists to unhinge the nervous
systems of white rats and guinea pigs, keeps the unhappy
pleasure-seekers in a condition of unconsummated alertness.
For one thing, New Orleans is inordinately noisy.
The drivers orient themselves largely by the use of their
horns, like bats. The residents are surly. The transient
population is completely miscellaneous and unrelated, so
that you never know what sort of behavior to expect from
anybody.
New Orleans was a strange town to me and I had no
way of making a junk connection. Walking around the
city, I spotted several junk neighborhoods: St. Charles and
Poydras, the area around and above Lee Circle, Canal and
Exchange Place. I don't spot junk neighborhoods by the
way they look, but by the feel, somewhat the same process
by which a dowser locates hidden water. I am walking
along and suddenly the junk in my cells moves and
twitches like the dowser's wand: "Junk here!"
I didn't see anybody around, and besides I wanted to
stay off, or at least I thought I wanted to stay off.
One night, I was in Frank's Bar off Exchange Place
drinking a rum and coke. It was an equivocal place: seamen
and longshoremen, queers, dealers from the all-night
poker game next door, arid some characters who could not
be classified. Standing next to me was a middle-aged man
with a long, thin face and gray hair. I asked him if he
would Join me in a beer.
He said, "I would, but unfortunately . . . unfortunately
I am not in a condition to reciprocate." Clearly a
man who made his living by physical work, self-educated,
a terrific bore once he has spotted you as "a man of intelligence."
I ordered two beers, and he went on telling me how he
was accustomed to reciprocate. When the beers came, he
said, "Shall we find a table where we can discuss the state
of the world and the meaning of life without being disturbed?"
We took our glasses to a table. I was preparing an
excuse to leave. The man said suddenly, "Now, for example,
I know that you are interested in narcotics."
"How do you know that?" I asked.
"I know," he said, smiling. "I know that you are here
to investigate narcotics. I've done a lot of work in that line
myself. I've been up to the FBI here fifty times to tell them
what I know. You know, of course, how narcotics ties
right in with Communism? I shipped out with the C and A
line last year. That line is Communist-controlled. The chief
engineer was one of them. I spotted him right away. He
used to smoke a pipe and light it with a cigarette lighter.
He used the lighter to signal." He showed me how the
engineer lighted his pipe with a cigarette lighter and covered
and uncovered the lighter to signal. "Oh, he was
smooth."
"Signal to whom?" I asked.
"I don't know exactly. There was a plane that followed
us for a while. I could hear it every time he went out
to light his pipe. Let me tell you something that may save
you a lot of time. The place to look for the information
you want is the Frontier Hotel. The same people that run
the Frontier Hotel here control the Standish Hotel in
Philadelphia. They are in on narcotics, and they are connected
with Communism."
"Isn't it dangerous for you to talk this way? You don't
know who I am. Suppose I was on the other side."
"I know who I'm talking to," he said. "If I didn't, I
wouldn't be here. I'd be dead. Out of all the people in this
bar I picked you, didn't I?"
"Yes, but why?"
"There is something that tells me what to do." He
showed me a religious medal he wore around his neck. "If
I didn't carry this I would have stopped a knife or a bullet
long ago."
"Why are you concerned about narcotics?"
"Because I don't like what it does to people. I had a
shipmate who used it."
"Tell me," I said, "exactly what is the tie-up between
narcotics and Communism?"
"You know the answer to that one a lot better than I
do. I see you are trying to find out how much I know. All
right. The same people are in both narcotics and Communism.
Right now they control most of America. I'm a
seaman. I've been shipping out for twenty years. Who gets
the jobs over there in the NMU Hall? American white men
like you and me? No. Dagos and Spiks and Niggers. Why?
Because the union controls shipping, and Communists control
the union."
"I'll be around if you need me," he said when I got up
to leave.
In the French Quarter there are several queer bars so
full every night the fags spill out on to the sidewalk. A
room full of fags gives me the horrors. They jerk around
like puppets on invisible strings, galvanized into hideous
activity that is the negation of everything living and spontaneous.
The live human being has moved out of these
bodies long ago. But something moved in when the original
tenant moved out. Fags are ventriloquists' dummies who
have moved in and taken over the ventriloquist. The
dummy sits in a queer bar nursing his beer, and uncontrollably
yapping out of a rigid doll face.
Occasionally, you find intact personalities in a queer
bar, but fags set the tone of these joints, and it always
brings me down to go into a queer bar. The bring-down
piles up. After my first week in a new town I have had
about all I can take of these joints, so my bar business goes
somewhere else, generally to a bar in or near Skid Row.
But I backslide now and then. One night, I got
lobotomized drunk in Frank's and went to a queer bar. I
must have had more drinks in the queer joint, because
there was a lapse of time. It was getting light outside when
the bar hit one of those sudden pockets of quiet. Quiet is
something that does not often happen in a queer joint. I
guess most of the fags had left. I was leaning against the
bar with a beer I didn't want in front of me. The noise
cleared like smoke and I saw a red-haired kid was looking
straight at me and standing about three feet away.
He didn't come on faggish, so I said, "How you making
it?" or something like that.
He said: "Do you want to go to bed with me?"
I said, "O.K. Let's go."
As we walked out, he grabbed my bottle of beer off
the bar and stuck it under his coat. Outside, it was daylight
with the sun just coming up. We staggered through the
French Quarter passing the beer bottle back and forth. He
was leading the way in the direction of his hotel, so he
said. I could feel my stomach knot up like I was about to
take a shot after being .off the junk a long time. I should
have been more alert, of course, but I never could mix
vigilance and sex. All this time he was talking on in a sexy
Southern voice which was not a New Orleans voice, and in
the daylight he still looked good.
We got to a hotel and he put me down some routine
why he should go in first alone. I pulled some bills out of
my pocket. He looked at them and said, "Better give me
the ten."
I gave it to him. He went in the hotel and came right
out.
"No rooms there," he said. "We'll try the Savoy."
The Savoy was right across the street.
"Wait here," he said.
I waited about an hour and by then it occurred to me
what was wrong with the first hotel. It'd had no back or
side door he could walk out of. I went back to my apartment
and got my gun. I waited around the Savoy and
looked for the kid through the French Quarter. About
noon, I got hungry and ate a plate of oysters with a glass
of beer, and suddenly felt so tired that when I walked out
of the restaurant my legs were folding under me as if
someone was clipping me behind the knees.
I took a cab home and fell across the bed without
taking off my shoes. I woke up around six in the evening
and went to Frank's. After three quick beers I felt better.
There was a man standing by the jukebox and I
caught his eye several times. He looked at me with a special
recognition, like one queer looks at another. He looked
like one of those terra-cotta heads that you plant grass in.
A peasant face, with peasant intuition, stupidity, shrewdness
and malice.
The jukebox wasn't working. I walked over and asked
him what was wrong with it. He said he didn't know. I
asked him to have a drink and he ordered coke. He told me
his name was Pat. I told him I had come up recently from
the Mexican border.
He said, "I'd like to get down that way, me. Bring
some stuff in from Mexico."
"The border is pretty hot," I said.
"I hope you won't take offense at what I say," he
began, "but you look like you use stuff yourself."
"Sure I use."
"Do you want to score?" he asked. "I'm due to score
in a few minutes. I've been trying to hustle the dough. If
you buy me a cap, I can score for you."
I said, "O.K."
We walked around the corner past the NMU hail.
"Wait here a minute," he said, disappearing into a
bar. I half-expected to get beat for my four dollars, but he
was back in a few minutes. "O.K." he said, "I got it."
I asked him to come back to my apartment to take a
shot. We went back to my room, and I got out my outfit
that hadn't been used in five months.
"If you don't have a habit, you'd better go slow with
this stuff," he cautioned me. "It's pretty strong."
I measured out about two-thirds of a cap.
"Half is plenty," he said. "I tell you it's strong."
"This will be all right," I said. But as soon as I took
the needle out of the vein, I knew it wasn't all right. I felt a
soft blow in the heart. Pat's face began to get black around
the edges, the blackness spreading to cover his face. 1
could
feel my eyes roll back in their sockets.
I came to several hours later. Pat was gone. I was
lying on the bed with my collar loosened. I stood up and
fell to my knees. I was dizzy and my head ached. Ten
dollars were missing from my watch-pocket. I guess he
figured I wasn't going to need it any more.
Several days later I met Pat in the same bar.
"Holy Jesus," he said, "I thought you was dying! I
loosened your collar and rubbed ice on your neck. You
turned all blue. So I says, `Holy Jesus, this man is dying!
I'm going to get out of here, me!"
A week later, I was hooked. I asked Pat about the
possibilities of pushing in New Orleans.
"The town is et up with pigeons," he said. "It's really
tough."
So I drifted along, scoring through Pat. I stopped
drinking, stopped going out at night, and fell into a routine
schedule: a cap of junk three times a day, and the time in
between to be filled somehow. Mostly, I spent my time
painting and working around the house. Manual work
makes the time pass fast. Of course, it often took me a
long time to score.
When I first hit New Orleans, the main pusher -- or
"the Man," as they say there -- was a character called Yellow.
Yellow was so named because his complexion was
yellow and liverish-looking. He was a thin little man with a
dragging limp. He operated out of a bar near the NMU
hail and occasionally choked down a beer to justify sitting
in the bar several hours a day. He was out on bail at the
time, and when his case came to trial he drew two years.
A period of confusion followed, during which it was
difficult to find a score. Sometimes I spent six or eight
hours riding around in the car with Pat, waiting and looking
for different people who might be holding. Finally, Pat
ran into a wholesale connection, a dollar-fifty per cap, no
less than twenty. This connection was Joe Brandon, one of
the few pushers I ever knew who didn't use the stuff himself.
Pat and I began pushing in a small way, just enough
to keep up our habits. We only took care of people Pat
knew well and was sure of. Dupr was our best customer.
He was a dealer in a gambling joint and always had money.
But he was a hog for junk and so couldn't keep his hand
out of the till. Eventually, he lost his job.
Don, an old neighborhood friend of Pat's, had a city
job. He inspected something, but was off half the time sick.
He never had money for more than one cap, and most of
the money he did have was given him by his sister. Pat told
me Don had cancer.
"Well," I said, "1 guess he']] die soon."
He did. He took to his bed, vomited for a week, and
died.
"Seltzer Willy" owned a seltzer truck, and had a seltzer
delivery route. This business bought him two caps a
day, but he was not a very enterprising seltzer pusher. He
was a thin, red-haired, mild-mannered man, the type described
as harmless.
"He's timid," said Pat. "Timid and stupid."
There were a few others who dropped by for an occasional
bang. One was called Whitey -- I never found out
why, because he was dark -- a fattish, stupid man who
worked as a waiter in one of the big hotels. He figured that
if he paid for one cap be was entitled to the next cap on
credit. Once, after Pat turned him down, he rushed to the
door in a rage and held up a nickel. "See this nickel," he
said. "You're going to be sorry you turned me down. I'm
going to call the People on you."
I told Pat we'd better stop serving Whitey.
"Yes," said Pat, "but he knows where I live. We ought
to find another place."
Another occasional was Lonny the Pimp, who had
grown up in his mother's whorehouse. Lonny tried to space
his shots so he wouldn't get a habit. He was always beefing
how he couldn't clear anything now, he had to put out so
much for hotel rooms, and the law kept him on the move.
"See what I mean?" he said, "There's no percentage."
Lonny was pure pimp. He was skinny and nervous.
He couldn't sit still and he couldn't shut up. As he talked,
he moved his thin hands which were covered on the backs
with long, greasy, black hairs. You could tell by looking at
him that he had a big penis. Pimps always do. Lonny was a
sharp dresser arid he drove a Buick convertible. But he
wouldn't hesitate to hang us up for credit on a two-dollar
cap.
After he took the shot he'd say, as he rolled down the
sleeve of his striped silk shirt and fastened his cufflinks,
"Look, boys, I'm a little short. You don't mind putting this
one on the cuff, do you? You know I'm good for it."
Pat would look at him with his little bloodshot eyes. A
surly peasant look. "For Chris' sake, Lonny, we have to
put out for this stuff. How would you like it if people came
in on you, laid your girls and then wanted to put it on the
cuff?" Pat shook his head. "You're like all of them. Once
they get it in the vein that's all they care. Here I have a
cool place where they can come and shoot, and what consideration
do I get? Once they get it in the vein that's all
they care."
"Well, look, Pat, I don't want to hang you up. Now
here's a dollar and I'll bring the rest this afternoon. O.K.?"
Pat took the dollar and put it in his pocket without
saying anything. He pursed his lips in disapproval.
Seltzer Willy dropped by around ten o'clock on his
route, took a cap and bought a cap for the night. Dupr
came in around twelve when he got off work. He was art
the night shift. The others came any time they had the
inclination.
Bob Brandon, our connection, was out on bail. He
was charged in State Court with possession of junk, a
felony under Louisiana law. The case against him was
based on traces -- that is, he got rid of the junk before the
cops shook his place down. But he did not wash out the
jars in which the junk had been kept. The Federals will not
take a "traces" case, so the State took it. This is regular
procedure in Louisiana. Any case too shaky for the Federal
Courts passes to the State Courts who will prosecute
anything. Brandon expected to beat the case. He had good
connections with the political machine and in any event
the State had a weak case. But the D.A. dragged in Brandon's
record, which included a murder conviction, and he
drew two to five years.
Pat found another connection right away and we went
on pushing. A peddler named Jonkers began selling on the
corner of Exchange and Canal. Pat lost a few customers to
Jonkers. Actually, Jonkers' stuff was better, and sometimes
I scored from Jonkers, or Jonkers' partner, an old oneeyed
character named Richter. Pat always found out
somehow -- he was intuitive as a possessive mother -- and
then he would sulk for two or three days.
Jonkers and Richter did not last long. Exchange and
Canal is one of the hottest spots in New Orleans for junk.
One day they were gone and Pat said, "Now you'll see
some of those guys come back to me. I told Lonny, `If you
want to score off Jonkers, go ahead, but don't come back
here and expect me to serve you.' You'll see what I tell him
if he comes back here. Whitey, too. He's been scoring off
Jonkers." Pat gave me a long sullen look.
One day the woman who managed Pat's hotel stopped
me in the lobby. "I just want to tell you to be careful," she
said. "The cops were here yesterday and made a thorough
investigation of Pat's room. And they arrested the boy with
the seltzer truck. He's in jail now."
I thanked her. A little later Pat came in. He told me
the cops had grabbed Seltzer Willy as he left the hotel.
They didn't find any junk on him so they took him to the
third precinct to "hold for investigation." He was there
seventy-two hours, which is the longest period they can
hold anyone without placing charges.
The cops searched Pat's room, but he kept his junk
stashed in the hall so they didn't find it. Pat said. "They
told me, `We have information you're running a regular
shooting gallery up here. You'd better pack in, because
next time we're going to come and take you, that's all.'"
"Well," I said, "better pack in except for Dupr. No
harm to serve him."
"Dupr lost his job," Pat said, "He's already into me
for twenty dollars."
We were back looking for a score every day. We
found out that Lonny was "the Man." That is the way it
went in New Orleans. You never knew who was going to
be "the Man" next.
About this time an anti-narcotics drive hit the town.
The chief of police said, "This drive is going to continue as
long as there is a single violator left in this city." The State
legislators drew up a law making it a crime to be a drug
addict. They did not specify where or when or what they
meant by drug addict.
The cops began stopping addicts on the street and
examining their arms for needle marks. If they found
marks, they pressured the addict to sign a statement admitting
his condition so he could be charged under the "drug
addicts law." The addicts were promised a suspended sentence
if they would plead guilty and get the new law
started.
Addicts ransacked their persons looking for veins to shoot
in outside the arm area. If the law could find no marks on
a man they usually let him go. If they found marks they
would hold him for seventy-two hours and try to make him
sign a statement.
Lonny's wholesale connection gave out and a character
called Old Sam was "the Man." Old Sam was after
doing twelve years in Angola. He operated in the territory
directly above Lee Circle, which is another hot spot in
New Orleans for junk or anything.
One day I was broke and I wrapped up a pistol to take
it in town and pawn it. When I got to Pat's roam there
were two people there. One was Red McKinney. a
shriveled-up, crippled junkie; the other was a young merchant
seaman named Cole. Cole did not have a habit at
this time and he wanted to connect for some weed. He was
a real tea head. He told me he could not enjoy himself
without weed. I have seen people like that. For them, tea
occupies the place usually filled by liquor. They don't have
to have it in any physical sense, but they cannot have a
really good time without it.
As it happened I had several ounces of weed in my
house. Cole agreed to buy four caps in exchange for two
ounces of weed. We went out to my place, Cole tried the
weed and said it was good. So we started out to score.
Red said he knew a connection on Julia Street. "We
should be able to find him there now."
Pat was sitting at the wheel of my car on the nod. We
were on the ferry, crossing from Algiers, where I lived, to
New Orleans. Suddenly Pat looked up and opened his
bloodshot eyes.
"That neighborhood is too hot," he said loudly.
"Where else can we score?" said McKinney. "Old Sam
is up that way, too."
"I tell you that neighborhood is too hot," Pat repeated.
He looked around resentfully, as though what he
saw was unfamiliar and distasteful.
There was, in fact, no place else to score. Without a
word, Pat started driving in the direction of Lee Circle.
When we came to Julia Street, McKinney said to Cole,
"Give me the money because we are subject to see him any
time. He walks around this block. A walking connection."
Cole gave McKinney fifteen dollars. We circled the
block three times slowly, but McKinney did not see "the
Man."
"Well, I guess we'll have to try Old Sam," McKinney
said.
We began looking for Old Sam above Lee Circle. Old
Sam was not in the old frame rooming house where he
lived. We drove around slowly. Every now and then Pat
would see someone he knew and stop the car. No one had
seen Old Sam. Some of the characters Pat called to just
shrugged in a disagreeable way and kept walking.
"Those guys wouldn't tell you nothing," Pat said. "It
hurts `em to do anybody a favor."
We parked the car near Old Sam's rooming house,
and McKinney walked down to the corner to buy a package
of cigarettes. He came back limping fast and got in the
car.
"The law," he said. "Let's get out of here."
We started away from the curb and a prowl car
passed us. I saw the cop at the wheel turn around and do a
doubletake when he saw Pat.
"They've made us, Pat," I said. "Get going!"
Pat didn't need to be told. He gunned the car and
turned a corner heading for Corondolet. I turned to Cole,
who was in the back seat. "Throw out that weed," I ordered.
"Wait a minute," Cole replied. "We may lose them."
"Are you crazy?" I said. Pat, McKinney and I yelled
in chorus "Throw it out!"
We were on Corondolet headed downtown. Cole
threw the weed out and it skidded under a parked car. Pat
took the first right turn into a one-way street. The prowl
car was coming down the same street from the other end,
going the wrong way. An old cop trick. We were boxed in.
I heard Cole yell, "Oh, Lord, I've got another stick on
me!"
The cops jumped out with their hands on their guns,
but they did not draw them. They ran up to my car. One of
them, the driver who had spotted Pat, had a big smile on
his face. "Where did you get the car, Pat?" he asked.
The other cop opened the back door. "Everybody
out," he said.
McKinney and Cole were in the back seat. They got
out and the cops went through them. Right away the cop
who spotted Pat found the stick of weed in Cole's shirt
pocket.
"I've got enough here to hold the whole bunch of
them," he said. This cop had a smooth red face and he
kept smiling all the time. He found my gun in the glove
compartment. "This is a foreign gun," he said. "Have you
got it registered with the Internal Revenue Department?"
"I thought that only applied to full automatic weapons,"
I said, "that fire more than one shot with one pull of
the trigger."
"No," said the cop smiling, "it applies to all foreign
automatics." I knew he was wrong, but there was no percentage
in telling him so. He looked at my arms. "You've
been hooking that spot so much it's about to get infected,"
he said, pointing to a needle welt.
The wagon arrived and we all got in. We were taken
to the second precinct. The cops looked at my car papers.
They couldn't believe that the car was mine. I was searched
at least six times by different people. Eventually, we were
all locked in a cell about six by eight feet. Pat smiled and
rubbed his hands together.
"They're going to be some sick fucking dope fiends in
here," he said.
A little later the turnkey came and called my name. I
was taken to a small room that opened off the reception
room of the precinct. In the room were two detectives sitting
at a table. One was tall and fat with a deep South frog
face. The other was a middle-aged stocky Irish cop. He
was missing some front teeth, which gave.his face a suggestion
of harelip. This type cop could just as well be an
oldtime rod-riding thug. There was nothing of the bureaucrat
about him.
The frog-faced cop was obviously in charge of the
questioning. He told me to sit down at the table opposite
him. He pushed a package of cigarettes and a box of
matches across the table. "Have a cigarette," he said. The
Irish cop was sitting at the end of the table to my left. He
was close enough to reach me without getting up. The cop
in charge was studying the papers of my car. Everything
they had taken out of my pockets was spread on the table
in front of him, a glass case, identification papers, wallet.
keys, a letter from a friend in New York, everything but
my pocketknife, which the smooth-faced cop from the patrol
car had put in his pocket.
Suddenly I remembered about that letter. The friend
in New York who'd written it was a tea head and he
pushed weed from time to time. He'd written to me asking
the price of good weed in New Orleans. I asked Pat, who
quoted me a tentative price of forty dollars per pound. In
the letter on the table my friend made reference to the
forty-dollar rate and said he wanted some at that figure.
At first I thought they might pass over the letter. They
were on the Stolen Car Squad and they wanted a stolen
car. They kept looking at the papers and asking questions.
When I couldn't remember exact dates on the car, that was
the clincher. They seemed on the point of getting tough.
Finally, I said, "Well, it's just a question of checking.
When you check, you'll find out that I'm telling the truth
and the car is mine. But there is no way I can convince
you by talking. Of course, if you want me to say I stole the
car, I will. But when you check, you'll find out the car is
mine."
"We'll check, all right."
The frog-faced cop folded the car papers carefully and
put them aside. He picked up the envelope and looked at
the address and the postmark. Then he took the letter out.
He read the letter to himself. Then he read aloud, skipping
where there was no reference to weed. He put the letter
down and looked at me.
"Not only do you use weed," he said, "you peddle it,
too, and you've got a batch of this weed stashed somewhere."
He looked at the letter. "About forty pounds." He
looked at me. "You'd better straighten yourself out."
I didn't say anything.
The old Irish cop said, "He's like all these guys. He
ain't talking. Till they get their fucking ribs kicked in. Then
they'll talk, and be glad to talk."
"We're going out and search your house," the frogfaced
cop said. "If we find anything, your wife will be put
in jail, too. I don't know what will happen to your children.
They'll have to go to some home."
"Why don't you make the man a proposition?" the old
Irish cop said.
I knew that if they searched the house they would find
the stuff. "Call in the Federals and I'll show you where the
stuff is," I said. "But I want your word that the case will be
tried in Federal, and that my wife will not be molested."
The frog-faced cop nodded. "All right," he said. "I
accept your proposition." He turned to his partner. "Go
call Rogers," he said.
A few minutes later the old cop was back. "Rogers is
out of town and won't be back until morning, and Williams
is sick."
"Well, call Hauser."
We went out and got in the car. The old cop was
driving, and the captain was sitting in back with me.
"This is it here," said the captain.
The old cop stopped the car and honked. A man with
a pipe came out of the house and got in the back seat. He
looked at me and then looked away, puffing on his pipe.
The man looked young in the dark, but when we passed
under a street light I saw that his face was wrinkled, and
he had black circles under the eyes. It was a clean-cut,
American-boy face, a face that had aged but could not
mature. I assumed that he was a Federal agent.
After smoking in silence for several blocks, the agent
turned to me and took out his pipe. "Who are you scoring
off now?" he asked.
"It's hard to find a score now," I said. "Most of them
have gone away.
He began asking me who I knew, and I mentioned a
number of people who had already gone away. He seemed
pleased with this worthless information. If you dummy up
on cops they will slap you around. They want you to give
them something, even if what you give has no conceivable
use.
He asked what record I had, and I told him about the
script case in New York.
"How much time did you do on that?" he asked.
"None. It's a misdemeanor in New York. Public
Health law. Public Health Law Number 334, as I remember."
"He's pretty well versed," said the old cop.
The captain was explaining to the agent that I seemed
to have a particular fear of the State Courts, and that he
had made a deal with me to turn the case over to the
Federals.
"Well," said the agent, "that's the way the captain is.
He'll treat you right if you treat him right." He smoked for
a while. We were on the ferry to Algiers. "There's an easy
way and a hard way of doing things," he said finally.
When we got to the house the captain grabbed me by
the back of the belt. "Who's in there besides your wife?"
I said, "Nobody."
We came to the door, and the guy with the pipe
showed my wife his hunk of tin and opened the door. I
showed them the pound of weed I had in the house, and a
few caps of junk. This didn't satisfy the captain. He
wanted forty pounds of weed.
"You're not coming up with all of it, Bill," he kept
saying. "Come on, now. We've shown you every courtesy."
I told them there wasn't any more.
The man with the pipe looked at me. "We want it
all," he said. His eyes did not want anything very much. He
was standing under the light. His face had not only aged, it
had decayed. He had the look of a man suffering from a
fatal illness.
I said, "You've got it all."
He looked vaguely away and began poking about in
drawers and closets. He found some old letters which he
read sitting on his heels on the floor. I wondered why he
didn't sit in a chair. Evidently, he did not want to be
comfortable while reading someone else's mail. The two
cops from Stolen Cars were getting bored. Finally, they
collected the weed, the caps, and a .38 revolver I kept in
the house, and got ready to leave.
"He belongs to Uncle, now," said the captain to my
wife as they left the house.
They drove back to the Second Precinct and I was
locked in. This time I was locked in a different cell. Pat
and McKinney were in the next cell over. Pat called to me
and asked what happened.
"That's tough," he said when I told him.
Pat had given a wagon-chasing lawyer ten dollars to
get
him out in the morning.
I was in a cell with four strangers, three of them
addicts. There was only one bench and that was occupied,
so the rest of us stood up or lay down on the floor. I lay
down on the floor beside a man named McCarthy. I had
seen him around town. He had been in for almost seventytwo
hours. Every now and then he would groan slightly.
Once he said, "Isn't this hell?"
A junky runs on junk time. When his junk is cut off,
the clock runs down and stops. All he can do is hang on
and wait for non-junk time to start. A sick junkie has no
escape from external time, no place to go. He can only
wait.
Cole was talking about Yokohama. "All that good
Henry and Charly. When you shoot Henry and Charly,
you can smell it going in."
McCarthy groaned hollowly from the floor. "Man,"
he said, "don't talk about that stuff."
Next morning, we were taken to line-up. A kid with
epilepsy was ahead of us on the stage. The cops took a
long time wisecracking with this subnormal character.
"How long you been in New Orleans?"
"Thirty-five days."
"What have you been doing all that time?"
"I've been in jail thirty-three days."
They thought that was funny and batted it around for
another five minutes or so.
When our turn came, the cop who ran the line-up
read off the circumstances of the case.
"How many times you been here?" they asked Pat.
Some cop laughed and said, "About forty times."
They asked each of us how many times arrested and
how much time done. When they came to me, they asked
how much time I did on the New York script charge. I
said, "None. I got a suspended sentence."
"Well," said the cop in charge of the line-up. "You'll
get one here, too."
All of a sudden there was a tremendous slobbering
and screaming off stage, and I thought for a minute the
cops were working over the epileptic. But when I walked
off the stage, I saw that he was flopping around on the
floor in a fit while two detectives were hovering around
trying to talk to him. Someone went for a doctor.
We were locked in a cell. A fat dick who seemed to
know Pat came and stood at the door. "The guy's a psycho,"
he said. "He's saying now, `Take me to my captain.'
A psycho. I sent for the doctor."
After two hours or so, they took us back to the precinct
where we waited some more hours. About noon, the
guy with the pipe and another man came to the precinct
and drove a bunch of us over to the Federal Building. The
new man was young and fattish. He was chewing on a
cigar. Cole, McCarthy, I and two Negroes piled into the
back seat. The guy with the cigar was driving. He took his
cigar out and turned to me.
"What is it you do, Mr. Lee?" he asked politely, in the
accents of an educated man.
"Farm," I answered.
The man with the pipe laughed.
"Corn with weed between the rows, eh?" he said.
The man with the cigar shook his head. "No," he said.
"It won't grow well in corn. It has to grow by itself."
He
turned to McCarthy, speaking over his shoulder. "I'm
going to send you up to the penitentiary at Angola," he
said.
"Why, Mr. Morton?" asked McCarthy.
"Because you're a goddamned drug addict."
"Not me, Mr. Morton."
"What about those needle marks?"
"I have syphilis, Mr. Morton."
"All junkies have syphilis," said Morton. His voice
was cool, condescending, amused.
The guy with the pipe was making an unsuccessful
attempt to kid one of the Negroes. The Negro was called
Clutch because of a deformed hand.
"Old monkey climbing up on your back?" asked the
man with the pipe.
"I don't know what you're talking about now," said
Clutch. It was just a flat statement. There was no insolence.
Clutch did not have a junk habit and he was saying
so.
They parked in front of the Federal Building and took
us up to the fourth floor. Here we waited around in an
outer office and were summoned to the inner office one at a
time for questioning. When my turn came I walked in and
the man with the cigar was sitting at a table. He motioned
me to a chair.
"I'm Mr. Morton," he said. "A Federal narcotics
agent. Do you want to make a statement? As you know,
you have a Constitutional right to refuse. Of course, it
takes more time for you to be charged in the event you do
not make a statement."
I said I would make a statement.
The man with the pipe was there.
"Bill isn't feeling very well today," he said. "Maybe a
little shot of heroin would help."
"Maybe," I said. He began asking me questions, some
of them so pointless that I could hardly believe what I
heard. Clearly, he had no cop intuition. No way of knowing
what was important and what was not.
"Who are your connections in Texas?"
"I don't have any." This was true.
"Do you want to see your wife in jail?"
I wiped the sweat off my face with a handkerchief.
"No," I said.
"Well, she's going to be in jail. She uses this benzedrine.
That's worse than junk. Are you and your wife
legally married?"
"Common law."
"I asked are you and your wife legally married?"
"No."
"Have you studied psychiatry?"
"What?"
"I asked, have you studied psychiatry?"
He had read a letter from a friend of mine who is a
psychiatrist. In fact, he had taken all my old letters away
with him after he searched the house.
"No, I have not studied psychiatry. Just a hobby, you
might say."
"You have some peculiar hobbies."
Morton leaned back in his chair and yawned.
The man with the pipe suddenly doubled his fist and
hit himself in the chest. "I'm a cop, see?" he said. "Wherever
I go I associate with cops. Your business is narcotics.
It stands to reason you know the other people in your line
of business. We don't deal with people like you once a
month. We deal with them every day. You weren't alone in
this. You have connections in New York, Texas, and here
in New Orleans. Now, you had some deal lined up, something
was about to materialize."
"I think we'll let this farmer do his fanning up at
Angola if he can't give us any information," said Morton.
"What about this hot-car ring?" said the man with the
pipe, turning his back to me and walking across the room.
"What hot-car ring?" I asked, really surprised. It was
sometime later I remembered a letter five years old that
contained a reference to stolen cars. He went on and on.
He mopped his brow and stalked around the room. Finally,
Morton cut him short.
"As I see it, Mr. Lee," he said, "you are prepared to
admit your own guilt, but not to involve anybody else, is
that correct?"
"That's correct," I said.
He shifted his cigar. "Well," he said, "that's all for the
present. How many more out there?" he called.
A cop stuck his head in. "About five."
Morton made a movement of exasperation. "There's
no time. I have to be in court at one o'clock. Bring them
all in."
All the others came in and stood around in front of
the table. Morton leafed through a stack of papers. He
looked at McCarthy and turned to a young agent with a
crewcut.
"Have you got anything on him?" he asked.
The agent shook his head and smiled. He raised one
foot. "See this foot?" he said to McCarthy. "I'm going to
put it right down your throat."
"I'm not fooling with stuff, Mr. Morton," said Mc-
Carthy, "because I don't want to go to the penitentiary."
"What were you doing standing on the corner with
those other junkies?"
"I just walked by. I was Regal-ing up, Mr. Morton."
(The reference is to Regal Beer, a New Orleans product.)
"I Regal up every chance I get. Look here." He took some
cards out of his wallet and showed them around like a
magician about to do a card trick. Nobody looked at the
cards. "I work as a waiter, and here's my union card. I can
get on at the Roosevelt over the week-end. There's a convention
stopping there. It's a good deal if you guys will let
me go."
He walked over to Morton and held out his hand.
"Give me a dime, Mr. Morton, for carfare."
Morton slapped a coin into his hand.
"Get your cotton-picking ass out of here," he said.
"We'll get you next time," the agents shouted in
chorus, but Mccarthy was out the door.
The young agent with the crewcut laughed. "I'll bet he
took the stairs."
Morton was gathering up his papers and shoving them
into a briefcase. "I'm sorry," he said, "but I can't take any
more statements from the rest of you this afternoon."
"I sent for the wagon," said the guy with the pipe.
"We'll take them over to the Third Precinct and put them
on ice.
At the Third Precinct, Cole and I had a cell to Ourselves.
I lay down on the bench. There was a raw ache
through my lungs. People vary in the way funk sickness
affects them. Some suffer mostly from vomiting and diarrhea.
The asthmatic type, with narrow and deep chest, is
liable to violent fits of sneezing, watering at eyes and nose,
in same cases spasms of the bronchial tubes that shut off
the breathing. In my case, the worst thing is lowering of
blood pressure with consequent loss of body liquid, and
extreme weakness, as in shock. It is a feeling as if the life
energy has been shut off so that all the cells in the body are
suffocating. As 1 lay there on the bench I felt like I was
subsiding into a pile of bones.
We were in the Third Precinct about three hours and
then the laws put us in the wagon and took us to Parish
Prison, for no reason that I could see. The man with the
pipe met us at Parish and took us to the Federal Building.
A middle-aged, faceless bureaucrat told me he was
head of the New Orleans office. Did I want to make a
statement?
"Yes," I said. "You write it and I'll sign it."
His face wasn't blank or expressionless. It simply
wasn't there. The only thing I remember about his face is
that he wore glasses. He called in a stenographer and got
ready to dictate a statement. He turned to the man with the
pipe who was sitting there on a desk, and asked if there
was anything special he wanted to put in the statement.
The man with the pipe said, "Well, no, that's the
whole story."
The head bureaucrat seemed to think of something.
"Wait a minute," he said. He led the man with the pipe
into another office. They came back after a few minutes
and the bureaucrat went on with his statement. The. statement
admitted possession of the weed and heroin found in
my house.
He asked how I acquired the heroin.
I said I went to Exchange and Canal and contacted a
street peddler.
"What did you do then?" he asked.
"I drove home."
"In your own car?"
I saw what he was getting at, but did not have the
energy to say, "I changed my mind. I don't want to make
any statement." Besides, I was afraid of spending another
day sick in the precinct. So I said, "Yes."
Finally, I signed a separate statement to the effect that
it was my intention to plead guilty to these charges in
Federal Court. I was taken back to the Second Precinct.
The agents assured me I would be charged first thing the
next morning.
Cole said, "You'll feel better in five days. Only time,
or a shot, will take away the bad feeling."
I knew this, of course. No one will stand still for junk
sickness unless he is in jail or otherwise cut off from junk.
The reason it is practically impossible to stop using and
cure yourself is that the sickness lasts five to eight days.
Twelve hours of it would be easy, twenty-four possible, but
five to eight days is too long.
I lay on the narrow wood bench, twisting from one
side to the other. My body was raw, twitching, tumescent,
the junk-frozen flesh in agonizing thaw. I turned over on
my stomach and one leg slipped off the bench. I pitched
forward and the rounded edge of the bench, polished
smooth by the friction of cloth, slid along my crotch.
There was a sudden rush of blood to my genitals at the
slippery contact. Sparks exploded behind my eyes; my legs
twitched -- the orgasm of a hanged man when the neck
snaps.
The turnkey opened the door of my cell. "Your lawyer
is here to see you, Lee," he said.
The lawyer looked at me quite a while before he introduced
himself. He had been recommended to my wife,
and I had not seen him before. The turnkey led the way to
a large room above the cell block where there were
benches.
"I can see you don't feel much like talking now," the
lawyer began. "We'll go into the details later on. Did you
sign anything?"
I told him about the statement.
"That was to get your car," he said. "You're charged
in State. I talked to the Federal D.A. an hour ago on the
phone and asked if he was going to take the case. He said,
`Absolutely no. There's an illegal seizure involved, and
under no circumstances will this office prosecute the case.'
I think I can get you over to the hospital for a shot," he
said, after a pause. "The man at the desk now is a good
friend of mine. I'll go down and talk to him."
The turnkey took me back to my cell. A few minutes
later he opened the door again and said, "Lee, do you want
to go to the hospital?"
Two cops took me over to Charity Hospital in the
wagon. The nurse at the receiving desk wanted to know
what was wrong with me.
"Emergency case," said one of the cops. "He fell off a
building."
The cop walked away and came back with a heavy-set
young doctor with reddish hair and gold-rimmed glasses.
The doctor asked a few questions and looked at my arms.
Another doctor with a long nose and hairy arms walked up
to put in his two cents.
"After all, doctor," he said to his colleague, "there is
the moral question. This man should have thought of all
this before he started using narcotics."
"Yes, there is the moral question, but there is also a
physical question. This man is sick." He turned to a nurse
and ordered half a grain of morphine.
As the wagon jolted along on the way back to the
precinct, I felt the morphine spread through all my cells.
My stomach moved and rumbled. A shot when you are
very sick always starts the stomach moving. Normal
strength came back to all my muscles. I was hungry and
sleepy.
About eleven the next morning, a bondsman came
around so I could sign the bond. He had the embalmed
look of all bondsmen, as though paraffin had been injected
under the skin. My lawyer, Tige, showed up around twelve
to check me out. He had made arrangements for me to go
directly to a sanitarium to take a cure. He told me the
cure was necessary from a legal point of view. We drove
to a sanitarium in a police car with two detectives. This
was part of the lawyer's plan, and the detectives fitted in
as possible witnesses.
When we stopped in front of the sanitarium, the lawyer
pulled some bills out of his pocket and turned to one of
the cops. "Put this on that horse for me, will you?" he
said.
The dick's frog-eyes bugged out with indignation. He
made no move to take the money. "I'm not going to put
any money on a horse," he said.
The lawyer laughed and tossed the money onto the
seat of the car. "Mack will," he said.
This apparent tactlessness in paying off the cops in
front of me was deliberate. When they asked him later
what was the idea, he said, "Why, that boy was too sick to
notice anything." So if these two cops were called as witness
they would say I seemed in very bad shape. The point
was, the lawyer wanted witnesses who would testify I was
in bad shape at the time I signed the statement.
An attendant took my clothes and I lay down on the
bed waiting for a shot. My wife came to see me and reported
that the -management did not know anything about
junk or junkies.
"When I told them you were sick, they said, `What's
the mailer with him?' I told them you were sick and that
you needed a shot of morphine, and they said, `Oh, we
thought it was just a question of a marijuana habit.'"
"A marijuana habit!" I said. "What in hell is that?
Find out what they plan to give me," I told her. "I need a
reduction cure. If they aren't going to give me one, check
me out of here right now."
She came back shortly and told me she finally got a
doctor on the phone who seemed to know what the score
was. This was the lawyer's doctor who was not connected
with the sanitarium.
"He seemed surprised when I told him you hadn't had
anything. He said he would call the hospital right away
and see that you were taken care of."
A few minutes later a nurse came in with a hypo. It
was demerol. Demerol helps some, but it is not nearly as
effective as codeine in relieving junk sickness. A doctor
came that evening to give me a physical examination. My
blood was thick and concentrated by loss of body fluid.
During the forty-eight hours I had been without junk, I
lost ten pounds. It took the doctor twenty minutes to draw
a tube of blood for a blood test because the thick blood
kept clotting in the needle.
At nine p.m., I got another shot of demerol. This shot
had no effect. The third day and night of junk sickness are
generally the worst. After the third day, the sickness begins
to recede. I felt a cold burn over the whole surface of my
body as though the skin was one solid hive. It seemed like
ants were crawling around under the skin.
It is possible to detach yourself from most pain --
injury to teeth, eyes, and genitals present special difficulties
-- so that the pain is experienced as neutral excitation.
From junk sickness there seems to be no escape. Junk
sickness is the reverse side of junk kick. The kick of junk is
that you have to have it. Junkies run on junk time and
junk metabolism. They are subject to junk climate. They
are warmed and chilled by junk. The kick of junk is living
under junk conditions. You cannot escape from junk sickness
any more than you can escape from junk kick after a
shot.
I was too weak to get out of bed. I could trot lie still.
In junk sickness, any conceivable line of action or inaction
seems intolerable. A man might die simply because he
could not stand to stay in his body.
At six o'clock in the morning I got another shot,
which seemed to have some effect. As I learned later, this
shot was not demerol. I was even able to eat a little toast
and drink some coffee.
When my wife came to see me later in the day, she
told me that they were using a new treatment in my case.
The treatment had started with my morning shot.
"I noticed a difference. I thought the morning shot
was M."
"I talked to Dr. Moore on the phone. He told me this
is the wonder drug they have been looking for to treat drug
addiction. It relieves withdrawal symptoms without forming
a new habit. It isn't a narcotic at all. It is one of the
anti-histamines. Thephorin, I believe he said."
"Then it would seem withdrawal symptoms are an
allergic reaction."
"That's what Dr. Moore says."
The doctor who recommended this treatment was my
lawyer's doctor. He was not connected with the sanitarium
and he was not a psychiatrist. In two days I could eat a full
meal. The anti-histamine shots lasted three to five hours
and then the sickness came back. The shots felt like junk.
When I was up and walking around, a psychiatrist
came to interview me. He was very tall. He had long legs
and a heavy body shaped like a pear with the narrow end
up. He smiled when he talked and his voice was whiny. He
was not effeminate. He simply had none of whatever it is
that makes a man a man. This was Dr. Fredericks, head
psychiatrist of the hospital.
He asked the question they all ask. "Why do you feel
that you need narcotics, Mr. Lee?"
When you hear this question you can be sure that the
man who asks it knows nothing about junk.
"I need it to get out of bed in the morning, to shave
and eat breakfast."
"I mean psychically."
I shrugged. Might as well give him his diagnosis so he
will go. "It's a good kick."
Junk is not a "good kick." The point of junk to a user
is that it forms the habit. No one knows what junk is until
he is junk sick.
The doctor nodded. Psychopathic personality. He
stood up. Suddenly he moved his face into a smile that was
obviously intended to be understanding and to dissolve my
reticence. The smile took over and ended up an insane leer.
He leaned forward and brought his smile close to my face.
"Is your sex life satisfactory?" he asked. "Do you and
your wife have satisfactory relations?"
"Oh yes," I said, "when I'm not on the junk."
He straightened up. He didn't like my answer at all.
"Well, I'll see you again." He blushed and lunged
awkwardly for the door. I had made him for a faker when
he walked in the room -- obviously he was putting down a
self .assured routine for himself and the others -- but I had
expected a deeper and tougher front.
The doctor told my wife I had a very bad prognosis.
My attitude towards junk was "so what?" A relapse was to
be expected because the psychic determinants of my condition
remained in operation. He could not help me unless I
agreed to cooperate. Given cooperation, he apparently was
ready to take down my psyche and reassemble it in eight
days.
The other patients were a pretty square and sorry lot.
Not another junky in the place. The only patient in my
ward who knew the score was a drunk who came in with a
broken jaw and other injuries of the face. He told me all
the public hospitals turned him away. At Charity they told
him: "Get out of here. You're dripping blood all over the
floor." So he came to this sanitarium where he had been
before and they knew he was good for the bill.
The others were a beat, nowhere bunch of people. The
type psychiatrists like. The type Dr. Fredericks could impress.
There was a thin, pale, little man with bloodless,
almost transparent, flesh. He looked like a cold and enfeebled
lizard. This character complained of nerves and
spent most of the day wandering up and down the halls,
saying, "Lord, Lord, I don't even feel like a human." He
did not have the concentration of energy necessary to hold
himself together and his organism was always on the point
of disintegrating into its component parts.
Most of the patients were old. They looked at you
with the puzzled, resentful, stupid look of a moribund cow.
A few never left their rooms. One young schizophrenic had
both hands fastened in front with a bandage so he could
not bother the other patients. A depressing place and depressing
people.
I was feeling the shots less all the time and after eight
days I began to pass them up. When I had passed the shots
for twenty-four hours, I decided it was time to leave.
My wife went to see Dr. Fredericks and caught him in
the hail outside his office. He said I should stay four or five
days longer. "He doesn't know it yet," the doctor said, "but
his shots are stopped from now on."
"He's already passed up the shots for twenty-four
hours," my wife told him.
The doctor got very red in the face. When he could
talk, he said, "Anyway, he might develop withdrawal
symptoms."
"It isn't likely after ten days, is it?"
"He might," said the doctor, and walked away before
she could say anything else.
"To hell with him," I told her. "We don't need his
testimony. Tige wants to use his own doctor as a witness to
my condition. No telling what this jerk might say on the
stand."
Dr. Fredericks had to sign my discharge from the
hospital. He stayed in his office and a nurse took the paper
in so he could sign it. Of course, he wrote "against medical
advice" on the discharge.
It was five in the afternoon when we left the hospital
and took a cab to Canal Street. I went into a bar and drank
four whisky sodas and got a good lush kick. I was cured.
As I walked across the porch of my house and opened
the door, I had the feel of returning after a long absence. I
was coming back to the point in time I left a year ago
when I took that first "joy bang" with Pat.
After a junk cure is complete, you generally feel fine
for a few days. You can drink, you can feel real hunger
and pleasure in food, and your sex desire comes back to
you. Everything looks different, sharper. Then you hit a
sag. It is an effort to dress, get out of a chair, pick up a
fork. You don't want to do anything or go anywhere. You
don't even want junk. The junk craving is gone, but there
isn't anything else. You have to sit this period out. Or work
it out. Farm work is the best cure.
Pat came around as soon as he heard I was out. Did I
want to "pick up?" Just one wouldn't hurt any. He could
get a good price on ten or more. I said no. You don't need
will power to say no to junk when you are off. You don't
want it.
Besides, I was charged in State, and State junk raps
pile up like any other felony. Two junk raps can draw you
seven years, or you can be charged in State on one and
Federal on the other so that when you walk out of the
State joint the Federals meet you at the door. If you do
your Federal time first, then the State is waiting for you at
the door of the Federal joint.
I knew the law was out to hang another on me because
they had messed up the deal by coming on like
Federals and by searching the house without a warrant. I
had a free hand to arrange my account of what happened
since there was no statement with my signature on it to tie
me down. The State could not introduce the statement I
had signed for the Federals without bringing up the deal I
had made with that fair-play artist, the fat captain. But if
they could hang another charge on me, they would have a
sure thing.
Usually, a junky makes straight for a connection as
soon as he leaves any place of confinement. The law would
expect me to do this and they would be watching Pat. So I
told Pat I was staying off until the case was settled. He
borrowed two dollars and went away.
A few days later I was drinking in the bars around
Canal Street. When a junky off junk gets drunk to a certain
point, his thoughts turn to junk. I went into the toilet in
one bar, and there was a wallet on the toilet-paper box.
There is a dream feeling when .you find money. I opened
the wallet and took out a twenty, a ten and a five. I decided
to use some other toilet in same other bar and walked out
leaving a full martini.
I went up to Pat's room.
Pat opened the door and said, "Hello, old buddy, I'm
glad to see you."
Sitting on the bed was another man, who turned his
face to the door as I came in. "Hello, Bill," he said.
I looked at him a long three seconds before I recognized
Dupr. He looked older and younger. The deadness
had gone from his eyes and he was twenty pounds thinner.
His face twitched at intervals like dead matter coming
alive, still jerky and mechanical. When he was getting
plenty of junk, Dupr looked anonymous and dead, so you
could not pick him out of a crowd or recognize him at a
distance. Now, his image was clear and sharp. If you
walked fast down a crowded street and passed Dupr, his
face would be forced on your memory -- like in the card
trick where the operator fans the cards rapidly, saying,
"Take a card, any card," as he forces a certain card into
your hand.
When he was getting plenty of junk, Dupr was silent.
Now he was garrulous. He told me how he finally got so
deep in the till, he lost his job. Now he had no money for
junk. He couldn't even raise the price of PG and goofballs
to taper off. He talked on and on.
"It used to be, all the cops knew me before the War.
Many's the seventy-two hours I put in right over in the
Third Precinct. It was the First Precinct then. You know
how it is when you start to come off the stuff." He indicated
his genitals, pointing with all his fingers, then turning
the hand palm up. A concrete gesture as though he had
picked up what he wanted to talk about and was holding it
in his palm to show you. "You get a hard-on and shoot off
right in your pants. It doesn't even have to get hard. I
remember one time I was in with Larry. You know that
kid Larry. He was pushing a while back. I said, `Larry, you
got to do it for me.' So he took down his pants. You know
he had to do that for me."
Pat was looking for a vein. He pursed his lips in
disapproval. "You guys talk like degenerates."
"What the matter, Pat?" I said. "Can't you hit it?"
"No," he said. He moved the tie-up down to his wrist
to hit a vein in his hand.
Later, I stopped by my lawyer's office to talk about
the case and to ask whether I could leave the State and go
to the Rio Grande Valley in Texas, where I owned farm
property.
"You're hot as a firecracker in this town," Tige told
me. "I have permission from the judge for you to leave the
State. So you can go on to Texas any time you like."
"I might want to take a trip to Mexico," I said.
"Would that be okay?"
"So long as you are back here when your case comes
up. There are no restrictions on you. One client of mine
went to Venezuela. So far as I know, he's still there. He
didn't come back."
Tige was a hard man to figure. Was be telling me not
to come back? When he seemed to come on clumsy or
irrelevant, he was often following a plan. Some of his plans
extended far into the future. Often he would take up a
plan, see that it was nowhere, and drop it. For an intelligent
man, be could get some amazingly silly ideas. For
example, when I told him I had studied medicine in Vienna
(six months), he said:
"That's fine. Now suppose we say this. That you, having
studied medicine yourself, had confidence that with
your medical knowledge you could administer a cure to
yourself, and that it was for this purpose of giving yourself
a cure that you acquired the drugs that were found in your
possession."
I thought this was too thick for anyone to swallow.
"Not a good idea to come on too educated. Juries don't
like people who study in Europe."
"Well, you could easily loosen your tie and lapse into
a broad Southern accent."
I could see myself coming on like plain folks in a
phony Southern accent. I gave up trying to be one of the
boys twenty years ago. I told him this sort of act wasn't in
my line at all, and he never mentioned the idea again.
Criminal law is one of the few professions where the
client buys someone else's luck. The luck of most people is
strictly non-transferable. But a good criminal lawyer can
sell all his luck to a client, and the more luck he sells the
more he has to sell.
I left New Orleans several days later and went to the
Rio Grande Valley. The Rio Grande River runs into the
Gulf of Mexico at Brownsville. Sixty miles up river from
Brownsville is the town of Mission. The Valley runs from
Brownsville to Mission, a strip of ground sixty miles long
and twenty miles wide. The area is irrigated from the Rio
Grande River. Before irrigation, nothing grew here but
mesquite and cactus. Now it is one of the richest farm
areas in the U.S.
A three-lane highway runs from Brownsville to Mission,
and the towns of the Valley string out along this
highway. There are no cities in the Valley, and no country.
The area is a vast suburb of flimsy houses. The Valley is
flat as a. table. Nothing grows there but crops, citrus and
palms brought from California. A hot dry wind starts every
afternoon and blows until sundown. The Valley is citrus
country. Pink and red grapefruit grow there that will not
grow anywhere else. Citrus country is real-estate-promoted
country, country of "Bide-A-Wee" tourist courts and old
people waiting around to die. The whole Valley has the
impermanent look of a camp, or carnival. Soon the suckers
will all be dead and the pitchmen will go somewhere else.
During the Twenties, real estate operators brought
trainloads of prospects down to the Valley and let them
pick grapefruit right off the trees and eat it. One of these
pioneer promoters is said to have constructed a large artificial
lake and sold plots all around it. "The lake will subirrigate
your groves." As soon as the last sale closed, he
turned off the water and disappeared with his lake, leaving
the prospects sitting there in a desert.
As put down by the realtor, citrus is a flawless set-up
for old people who want to retire and take life easy. The
grove owner does nothing. A citrus association cares for
the grove and markets the fruit, and hands the owner a
check. Actually, citrus is a risky deal for the small investor.
Over a period of time the average return is high, especially
on the pink and ruby red fruit. But a small operator cannot
ride out the years when the prices are low, or the yield of
fruit small.
A premonition of doom hangs over the Valley. You
have to make it now before something happens, before the
black fly ruins the citrus, before support prices are taken
off the cotton, before the flood, the hurricane, the freeze,
the long dry spell when there is no water to irrigate, before
the Border Patrol shuts off your wetbacks. The threat of
disaster is always there, persistent and disquieting as the
afternoon wind. The Valley was desert, and it will be desert
again. Meanwhile you try to make yours while there is still
time.
Old men sitting in real estate offices say, "Well, this is
nothing new. I've seen all this before. I remember back in
`28..."
But a new factor, something that nobody has seen
before, is changing the familiar aspect of disaster like the
slow beginnings of a disease, so that no one can say just
when it began.
Death is absence of life. Wherever life withdraws,
death and rot move in. Whatever it is -- orgones, life force
-- that we all have to score for all the time, there is not
much of it in the Valley. Your food rots before you can get
it home. Milk sours before you can finish the meal. The
Valley is a place where the new anti-life force is breaking
through.
Death hangs over the Valley like an invisible smog.
The place exerts a curious magnetism on the moribund.
The dying cell gravitates to the Valley:
Gary West came from Minneapolis. He had saved up
twenty thousand dollars from operating a dairy farm during
the War. With this money he bought a house and grove
in the Valley. The place was on the far side of Mission,
where irrigation stops and the desert begins. Five acres of
Ruby Reds and a house in 1920 Spanish style. There he sat
with his mother, his wife, and two children. In his eyes you
could see the baffled, frightened, resentful looks of a man
who feels the stirring in his cells of a fatal disease process.
He was not sick at that time, but his cells were looking for
death and West knew it. He wanted to sell out and leave
the Valley.
"I feel closed in here. You have to go so far to get out
of the Valley," he would say.
He began running from one project to another. A
plantation in Mississippi, a winter vegetable set-up in Mexico.
He went back to Minnesota and bought into a cowfeed
company. He did this with the down payment on the
sale of his Valley property. But he couldn't keep away
from the Valley. He would run like a hooked fish until the
drag of his dying cells tired him out, and the Valley reeled
him in. He tried out various illnesses. A throat infection
settled in his heart. He lay in the McAllen Hospital and
tried to see himself as a man of business impatient to get
up and back to work. His projects became more and more
preposterous.
"That man is crazy," said Roy, the real estate man.
"He don't know what he wants."
Only the Valley was real to West now. There was no
other place for him to go. The other places were fantasy.
Listening to him talk, you got the uncanny feeling that
places like Milwaukee didn't exist. West rallied and went to
look over a fifteen-dollar-per-acre sheep-raising set-up in
Arkansas. He came back to the Valley and started building
a house on credit. Something went wrong with his kidneys,
and his body swelled up with urine. You could smell urine
on his breath and through his skin. "This is uremic poisoning,"
exclaimed the doctor as the smell of urine filled the
room. West went into convulsions and died. He left his
wife a tangle of exchange notes between Milwaukee and
the Valley that she will be ten years unraveling.
All the worst features of America have drained down
to the Valley and concentrated there. In the whole area
there is not one good restaurant. The food situation could
only be tolerated by people who do not taste what they eat.
In the Valley, restaurants are not operated by people who
are cookers and purveyors of food. They are opened by
somebody who decides that "people always eat" so a restaurant
is a "good deal." His place will have a glass front
so people can see in, and chromium fixtures. The food is
bad U.S. restaurant food. So there he sits in his restaurant
and looks at his customers with puzzled, resentful eyes. He
didn't much want to run a restaurant anyway. Now he isn't
even making money.
A lot of people made quick easy money during the
War and for several years after. Any business was good,
just as any stock is good on a rising market. People
thought they were sharp operators, when actually they
were Just riding a lucky streak. Now the Valley is in a
losing streak and only the big operators can ride it out. In
the Valley economic laws work out like a formula in high
school algebra, since there is no human element to interfere.
The very rich are getting richer and all the others are
going broke. The big holders are not shrewd or ruthless or
enterprising. They don't have to say or think anything. All
they have to do is sit and the money comes pouring in.
You have to get up with the Big Holders or drop out and
take any job they hand you. The middle class is getting the
squeeze, and only one in a thousand will go up. The Big
Holders are the house, and the small farmers are the players.
The player goes broke if he keeps on playing, and the
farmer has to play or lose to the Government by default.
The Big Holders own all the Valley banks, and when the
farmer goes broke the bank takes over. Soon the Big Holders
will own the Valley.
The Valley is like an honest dice table where the
players do not have the vitality to influence the dice and
they win or lose by pure chance. You never hear anyone
say, "It had to happen that way," or when they do say it
they are talking about a death. An event that "had to
happen that way" may be good or bad, but there it is, and
you cannot regret it or rehash it. Since everything that
happens in the Valley -- except death -- happens by chance,
the inhabitants are always tampering with the past like the
two-dollar bettor on the return train from the track: "I
should have hung on to that hundred acres on the lower
lift; I should have took up them oil leases; I should have
planted cotton instead of tomatoes." A nasal whine goes up
from the Valley, a vast muttering of banal regret and despair.
When I arrived in the Valley, I was still in the postcure
drag. I had no appetite and no energy. All I wanted to
do was sleep, and I slept twelve to fourteen hours a day.
Occasionally I bought two ounces of paregoric, drank it
with two goof balls and felt normal for several hours. You
have to sign for P.C. when you buy it, and I did not want
to bum down the drugstores. You can only buy P.G. so
often, or the druggist gets wise. Then he packs in, or ups
the price.
I had gone into partnership with a friend named
Evans to buy machinery, hire a farmer and raise a cotton
crop. We had a hundred and fifty acres in cotton. Good
cotton land will pick a bale to an acre, and the U.S. support
price guaranteed us a hundred and fifty dollars to a
bale. So we stood to gross about $22,000. The farmer did
all the actual work. Evans and I would drive around every
few days to see how the cotton was looking. It took us
about an hour to look at all our cotton because the fields
were scattered around from Edingburg to the lower lift,
almost on the river. There was no particular point in looking
at the cotton since neither of us knew the first thing
about it. We just drove around to pass the time until five
p.m., when we started drinking.
There were five or six regulars who gathered every
afternoon at Evans' house. Exactly at five, someone would
bang a tin pan and yell "Drinking time!" and the others
would jump up like fighters coming out at the bell. We
made our own gin from Mexican alcohol as a measure of
economy. Martinis mixed with this gin had a terrible taste,
and you had to fill the cocktail with pieces of ice or it
would be warm before you could get it down. I cannot
drink even good martinis in hot weather, so I made myself
a long drink with sugar and lime and seltzer and a tiny
pinch of quinine to approximate gin and tonic. No one in
the Valley had ever heard of quinine water.
All that summer was perfect cotton weather. I-lot and
dry, day after day. We started picking after the Fourth of
July and all our cotton was off by the September 1st deadline.
We broke a little better than even. High operating
costs and the high cost of living -- I figured it was costing
me about seven hundred a month to live in that valley
without a maid or a car -- took most of the profit. I decided
it was time to pull out of the Valley.
Early in October, 1 got a letter from the bonding
company saying my case was coming up in four days. I
called Tige and he said, "Pay no attention. I will get a
continuance." A few days later I got a letter from Tige
saying that he had scored for a three-week continuance,
but was doubtful of getting the trial put off again.
I called him on the phone and told him I was taking a
trip to Mexico. He said, "Fine. You just have as good a
time as you can in three weeks and be back here for the
trial."
I asked him how were the chances of another continuance.
He said, "Frankly, not good. I can't do a thing with
this judge. His ulcers are bothering him."
I decided to take steps to remain in Mexico when I
got there.
As soon as I hit Mexico City, I started looking for
junk. At least, I always had one eye open for it. As I said
before, I can spot junk neighborhoods. My first night in
town I walked down Dolores Street and saw a group of
Chinese junkies standing in front of an Exquisito Chop
Suey joint. Chinamen are hard to make. They will only do
business with another Chinaman. So I knew it would be a
waste of time trying to score with these characters.
One day I was walking down San Juan Ltran and
passed a cafeteria that had colored tile set in the stucco
around the entrance, and the floor was covered with the
same tile. The cafeteria was unmistakably Near Eastern.
As I walked by, someone came out of the cafeteria. He was
a type character you see only on the fringes of a junk
neighborhood.
As the geologist looking for oil is guided by certain
outcroppings of rock, so certain signs indicate the near
presence of junk. Junk is often found adjacent to ambiguous
or transitional districts: East Fourteenth near
Third in New York; Poydras and St. Charles in New Orleans;
San Juan Ltran in Mexico City. Stores selling artificial
limbs, wig-makers, dental mechanics, loft manufacturers
of perfumes, pomades, novelties, essential oils. A point
where dubious business enterprise touches Skid Row.
There is a type person occasionally seen in these
neighborhoods who has connections with junk, though he
is neither a user nor a seller. But when you see him the
dowser wand twitches. Junk is close. His place of origin is
the Near East, probably Egypt. He has a large straight
nose. His lips are thin and purple-blue like the lips of a
penis. The skin is tight and smooth over his face. He is
basically obscene beyond any possible vile act or practice.
He has the mark of a certain trade or occupation that no
longer exists. If junk were gone from the earth, there might
still be junkies standing around in junk neighborhoods feeling
the lack, vague and persistent, a pale ghost of junk
sickness.
So this man walks around in the places where he once
exercised his obsolete and unthinkable trade. But he is
unperturbed. His eyes are black with an insect's unseeing
calm. He looks as if he nourished himself on honey and
Levantine syrups that he sucks up through a sort of
proboscis.
What is his lost trade? Definitely of a servant class
and something to do with the dead, though he is not an
embalmer. Perhaps he stores something in his body -- a
substance to prolong life -- of which he is periodically
milked by his masters. He is as specialized as an insect, for
the performance of some inconceivably vile function.
The Chimu Bar looks like any cantina from the outside,
but as soon as you walk in you know you are in a
queer bar.
I ordered a drink at the bar and looked around. Three
Mexican fags were posturing in front of the jukebox. One
of them slithered over to where I was standing, with the
stylized gestures of a temple dancer, and asked for a cigarette.
There was something archaic in the stylized movements,
a depraved animal grace at once beautiful and
repulsive. 1 could see him moving in the light of campfires,
the ambiguous gestures fading out into the dark. Sodomy is
as old as the human species. One of the fags was sitting in
a booth by the jukebox, perfectly immobile with a stupid
animal serenity.
I turned to get a closer look at the boy who had
moved over. Now bad. "Por qu triste?" I asked. ("Why
sad?") Not much of a gambit, but I wasn't there to converse.
The boy smiled, revealing very red gums and sharp
teeth far apart. He shrugged and said something to the
effect that he wasn't sad or not especially so. I looked
around the room.
"Vmonos a otro lugar," I said. ("Lets go some place
else.")
The boy nodded. We walked down the street into an
all-night restaurant, and sat down in a booth. The boy
dropped his hand onto my leg under the table. I felt my
stomach knot with excitement. I gulped my coffee and
waited impatiently while the boy finished a beer and
smoked a cigarette.
The boy knew a hotel. I pushed five pesos through a
grill. An old man unlocked the door of a room and
dropped a ragged towel on the chair. "Llevas pistola?" --
("You carry a pistol?") -- asked the boy. He had caught
sight of my gun. I said yes.
I folded my pants and dropped them over a chair,
placing the pistol on my pants. I dropped my shirt and
shorts on the pistol. I sat down naked on the edge of the
bed and watched the boy undress. He folded his worn blue
suit carefully. He took off his shirt and placed it around his
coat on the back of a chair. His skin was smooth and
copper-colored. The boy stepped out of his shorts and
turned around and smiled at me. Then he came and sat
beside me on the bed. I ran one hand slowly over the boy's
back, following with the other hand the curve of the chest
down over the fiat brown stomach. The boy smiled and lay
down on the bed.
Later we smoked a cigarette, our shoulders touching
under the cover. The boy said he had to go. We both
dressed. I wondered if he expected money. I decided not.
Outside, we separated at a corner, shaking hands.
Some time later I ran into a boy named Angelo in the
same bar. I saw Angelo off and on for two years. When I
was on junk I wouldn't meet Angelo for months, but when
I got off I always ran into him on the street somewhere. In
Mexico your wishes have a dream power. When you want
to see someone, he turns up.
Once I had been looking for a boy and I was tired and
sat down on a stone bench in the Alameda. I could feel the
smooth stone through my pants, and the ache in my loins
like a toothache when the pain is light and different from
any other pain. Sitting there looking across the park, I
suddenly felt calm and happy, seeing myself in a dream
relationship with The City, and knew I was going to score
for a boy that night. I did.
Angelo's face was Oriental, Japanese-looking, except
for his copper skin. He was not queer, and I gave him
money; always the same amount, twenty pesos. Sometimes
I didn't have that much and he would say: "No importa."
( "it does not matter.") He insisted on sweeping the apartment
out whenever he spent the night there.
Once I connected with Angelo, I did not go back to
the Chimu. Mexico or Stateside, queer bars brought me
down.
The meaning of "maana" is "Wait until the signs are
right." If you are in a hurry to score for junk and go
around cracking to strangers, you will get beat for your
money and likely have trouble with the law. But if you
wait, junk will come to you if you want it.
I had been in Mexico City several months. One day I
went to see the lawyer I had hired to get working and
residence papers for me. A shabby middle-aged man was
standing in front of the office.
"He ain't come yet," the man said. I looked at the
man. He was an old-time junky, no doubt about it. And I
knew he didn't have any doubts about me either.
We stood around talking until the lawyer came. The
junky was there to sell some religious medals. The lawyer
had told him to bring a dozen up to his office.
After I had seen the lawyer, I asked the junky if he
would join me for supper and we went to a restaurant on
San Juan Ltran.
The junky asked me what my story was and I told
him. He flipped back his coat lapel and showed me a spike
stuck in the underside of the lapel.
"I've been on junk for twenty-eight years," he said.
"Do you want to score?"
There is only one pusher in Mexico City, and that is
Lupita. She has been in the business twenty years. Lupita
got her start with one gram of junk and built up from there
to a monopoly of the junk business in Mexico City. She
weighed three hundred pounds, so she started using junk
to reduce, but only her face got thin and the result is no
improvement. Every month or so she hires a new lover,
gives him shirts and suits and wrist watches, and then
packs him in when she has enough.
Lupita pays off to operate wide open, as if she was
running a grocery store. She doesn't have to worry about
stool pigeons because every law in the Federal District
knows that Lupita sells junk. She keeps outfits in glasses of
alcohol so the junkies can fix in the joint and walk out
clean. Whenever a law needs money for a quick beer, he
goes over by Lupita and waits for someone to walk out on
the chance he may be holding a paper. For ten pesos
($1.25) the cop lets him go. For twenty pesos, he gets his
junk back. Now and then, some ill-advised citizen starts
pushing better papers for less money, but he doesn't push
long. Lupita has a standing offer: ten free papers to anybody
who tells her about another pusher in the Federal
District. Then Lupita calls one of her friends on the narcotics
squad and the pusher is busted.
Lupita fences on the side. If anyone makes a good
score, she puts out a grapevine to find out who was in on
the job. Thieves sell to her at her price or she tips the law.
Lupita knows everything that happens in the lower-bracket
underworld of Mexico City. She sits there doling out papers
like an Aztec goddess.
Lupita sells her stuff in papers. It is supposed to be
heroin. Actually, it is pantopon cut with milk sugar and
some other crap that looks like sand and remains undissolved
in the spoon after you cook up.
I started scoring for Lupita's papers through Ike, the
old-time junky I met in the lawyer's office. I had been off
junk three months at this time. It took me just three days
to get back on.
An addict may be ten years off the junk, but he can
get a new habit in less than a week; whereas someone who
has never been addicted would have to take two shots a
day for two months to get any habit at all. I took a shot
daily for four months before I could notice withdrawal
symptoms. You can list the symptoms of junk sickness, but
the feel of it is like no other feeling and you can not put it
into words. I did not experience this junk sick feeling until
my second habit.
Why does an addict get a new habit so much quicker
than a junk virgin, even after the addict has been clean for
years? I do not accept the theory that junk is lurking in the
body all that time -- the spine is where it supposedly holes
up -- and I disagree with all psychological answers. I think
the use of junk causes permanent cellular alteration. Once
a junky, always a junky. You can stop using junk, but you
are never off after the first habit.
When my wife saw I was getting the habit again, she
did something she had never done before. I was cooking up
a shot two days after I'd connected with Old Ike. My wife
grabbed the spoon and threw the junk on the floor. I
slapped her twice across the face and she threw herself on
the bed, sobbing, then turned around and said to me:
"Don't you want to do anything at all? You know how
bored you get when you have a habit. It's like all the lights
went out. Oh well, do what you want. I guess you have
some stashed, anyway.
I did have some stashed.
Lupita's papers cost fifteen pesos each -- about two
dollars. They are half the strength of a two-dollar Stateside
cap. If you have any habit at all, it takes two papers to fix
you, and I mean just fix. To get really loaded, you would
need four papers. I thought this was an outrageous price
considering everything is cheaper in Mexico and I was
expecting bargain prices on junk. And here I was, paying
above-U.S. prices for junk of lower quality. Ike told me,
"She has to charge high because she pays off to the law."
So I asked Ike, "What about scripts?"
He told me the croakers could only prescribe M in
solution. The most they were allowed to prescribe in one
script was fifteen centogramos, or about two and a half
grains. I figured it would work out a lot cheaper than
Lupita, so we started hitting the croakers. We located several
who would write the script for five pesos, and five
more who would get it filled.
One script will last a day if you keep the habit down.
The trouble is, scripts are easier to get than to fill, and
when you do find a drugstore that will fill the script, like as
not the druggist steals all the junk and gives you distilled
water. Or he doesn't have any M and puts anything on the
shelf in the bottle. I have cashed scripts that came back full
of undissolved powder. I could have killed myself trying to
shoot this crap.
Mexican croakers are not like Stateside croakers.
They never pull that professional man act on you. A
croaker who will write at all will write without hearing a
story. In Mexico City, there are so many doctors that a lot
of them have a hard time making it. I know croakers who
would starve to death if they didn't write morphine scripts.
They don't have patient one, unless you call junkies patients.
I was keeping up Ike's habit as well as my own and it
ran into money.
I asked Ike what the score was on pushing in Mexico
City. He said it was impossible.
"You wouldn't last a week. Sure, you can get plenty
customers that would pay you fifteen pesos for a shot of
good M like we get with the scripts. But first time they
wake up sick with no money, they go right to Lupita and
tell her for a few papers. Or if the law grabs them, they
open their mouth right away. Some of them don't even
have to be asked. Right away they say, `Turn me loose and
I'll tell you somebody pushing junk.' So the law sends them
up to make a buy with the marked money, and that's it.
You're fucked right there. It's eight years for selling this
stuff and there's no bail.
"I have `em come to me: `Ike, we know you get stuff
on the scripts. Here's fifty pesos. Get me one script.' Sometimes
they got good watches or a suit of clothes. I tell `em
I'm off. Sure, I could make two hundred pesos a day, but I
wouldn't last a week."
"But can't you find like five or six good customers?"
"I know every hip in Mexico City. And I wouldn't
trust one of `em. Not one."
At first we filled the scripts without too much trouble.
But after a few weeks the scripts had piled up in the
drugstores that would fill M scripts and they began packing
in. It looked like we would be back with Lupita. Once or
twice we got caught short and had to score with Lupita.
Using that good drugstore M had run up our habits, and it
took two of Lupita's fifteen-peso papers to fix us. Now,
thirty pesos in one shot was a lot more than I could afford
to pay. I had to quit, cut down to where I could make it on
two of Lupita's papers per day, or find another source of
supply.
One of the script-writing doctors suggested to Ike that
he apply for a government permit. Ike explained to me that
the Mexican government issued permits to hips allowing
them a definite quantity of morphine per month at wholesale
prices. The doctor would put in an application for Ike
for one hundred pesos. I said, "Go ahead and apply," and
gave him the money. I did not expect the deal to go
through, but it did. Ten days later, he had a government
permit to buy fifteen grams of morphine every month. The
permit had to be signed by his doctor and the head doctor
at the Board of Health. Then he would take it to a drugstore
and have it filled.
The price was about two dollars per gram. I remember
the first time he filled the permit. A whole boxful of
cubes of morphine. Like a junkie's dream. I had never seen
so much morphine before all at once. I put out the money
and we split the stuff. Seven grams per month allowed me
about three grains per day, which was more than I ever
had in the States. So I was supplied with plenty of junk for
a cost of thirty dollars a month as compared with about
three hundred a month in the U.S.
During this time I did not get acquainted with the
other junkies in Mexico City. Most of them make their
junk money by stealing. They are always hot. They are all
pigeons. Not one of them can be trusted with the price of a
paper. No good can come from associating with these
characters.
Ike didn't steal. He made out selling bracelets and
medals that looked like silver. He had to keep ahead of his
customers because this phony silver turned black in a matter
of hours. Once or twice, he was arrested and charged
with fraud, but I always bought him out. I told him to find
some routine that was strictly legitimate, and he started
selling crucifixes.
Ike had been a booster in the States and claimed to
have scored for a hundred dollars a day in Chicago with a
spring suitcase he'd shoved suits into. The side of the suitcase
would spring back into place. All the money went for
coke and M.
But Ike would not steal in Mexico. He said even the
best thieves spend most of their time in the joint. In Mexico,
known thieves can be sent to the Tres Marias penal
colony without trial. There are no middle-class, whitecollar
thieves who make good livings, like you find in the
States. There are big operators with political connections,
and there are bums who spend half their time in jail. The
big operators are usually police chiefs or other high officials.
That is the setup in Mexico, and Ike did not have
connections to operate.
One junky I did see from time to time was a darkskinned
Yucatecan whom Ike referred to as "the Black
Bastard." The Black Bastard worked the crucifix routine.
He was, in fact, extremely religious and made the pilgrimage
to Chalma every year, going the last quarter mile
on his knees over rocks with two people holding him up.
After that, he was fixed for a year.
Our Lady of Chalma seems to be the patron saint of
junkies and cheap thieves because all Lupita's customers
make the pilgrimage once a year. The Black Bastard rents
a cubicle in the church and pushes papers of junk outrageously
cut with milk sugar.
I used to see the Black Bastard around from time to
time, and I heard a great deal about him from Ike. Ike
hated the Black Bastard only as one junky can hate another.
"The Black Bastard burned down that drugstore.
Going up there saying I sent him. Now the druggest won't
fill no more scripts."
So I drifted along from month to month. We were
always a little short at the end of the month and had to fill
a few scripts. I always had an insecure feeling when I was
out of stuff and a comfortable feeling of security when I
had those seven gramos stashed safely away.
Once Ike got fifteen days in the city prison -- the Carmen,
they call it -- for vagrancy. I was short and could not
pay the fine, and it was three days before I got in to see
him. His body had shrunk; all the bones stuck out in his
face; his brown eyes were bright with pain. I had a piece of
hop covered with cellophane in my mouth. I spit the hop
on half an orange and handed it to Ike. In twenty minutes,
he was loaded.
I looked around and noticed how the hips stood out as
a special group, like the fags who were posturing and
screeching in one corner of the yard. The junkies were
grouped together, talking and passing the junky gesture
back and forth.
Junkies all wear hats, if they have hats. They all look
alike, as if wearing a costume identical in some curious
way that escapes exact tabulation. Junk has marked them
all with its indelible brand.
Ike told me that the prisoners often steal the pants off
a newcomer. "Such a lousy people they got in here." I did
see several men walking around in their underwear. The
Commandante would catch wives and relatives bringing
junk to the prisoners, and shake them down for all they
had.
He caught one woman bringing a paper to her husband,
but she only had five pesos. So he took her dress and
sold it for fifteen pesos and she went home wrapped in an
old lousy sheet.
The place was crawling with pigeons. Ike was afraid
to hold any of the hap I brought him for fear the other
prisoners would take it or turn him over to the Commandante.
I fell into a routine of staying home with three or four
shots a day. For something to do, I enrolled in Mexico
City College. The students impressed me as a sorry-looking
lot, but then, I wasn't looking at them very hard.
When you look back over a year on the junk, it seems
like no time at all. Only the periods when you were sick
stand out. You remember the first few shots of a habit and
the shots when you were really sick.
(Even in Mexico there is always the day when everything
goes wrong. The drugstore is closed or your boy is
off duty, the croaker is out of town at some fiesta, and you
can't score.)
The end of the month. I was out of junk and sick.
Waiting for Old Ike to show with a morphine script. A
junky spends half his life waiting. There was a cat in the
house which we had been feeding, an ugly-looking gray
cat. 1 picked the animal up and held it on my lap, petting
it. When it tried to jump down I tightened my hold. The
cat began to mew, looking for a way to escape.
I brought my face down to touch the cat's cold nose
with mine, and the cat scratched at my face. It was a halfassed
scratch, and didn't even land. But it was all I needed.
I held the cat out at arm's length, slapping it back and
forth across the face with my free hand. The cat screamed
and clawed me, then started spraying piss all over my
pants. I went on hitting the cat, my hands bloody from
scratches. The animal twisted loose and ran into the closet,
where I could hear it groaning and whimpering with terror.
"Now I'll finish the bastard off," I said, picking up a
heavy painted cane. Sweat was running down my face. I
was trembling with excitement. I licked my lips and started
toward the closet, alert to block any escape attempt.
At this point my old lady intervened, and I put down
the cane. The cat scrambled out of the closet and ran down
the stairs.
Ike brought me cocaine when he could score for it. C
is hard to find in Mexico. I had never used any good coke
before. Coke is pure kick. It lifts you straight up, a mechanical
lift that starts leaving you as soon as you feel it. I
don't know anything like C for a lift, but the lift only lasts
ten minutes or so. Then you want another shot. When you
are shooting C, you shoot more M to level the C kick and
smooth out the rough edges. Without M, C makes you too
nervous, and M is an antidote for an overdose. There is no
tolerance with C, and not much margin between a regular
and a toxic dose. Several times I got too much and everything
went black and my heart began turning over. Luckily
I always had plenty of M on hand, and a shot of M fixed
me right up.
Junk is a biological necessity when you have a habit,
an invisible mouth. When you take a shot of junk you are
satisfied, just like you ate a big meal. But using C you want
another shot as soon as the effect wears off. If you have C
in the house, you will not go out to a movie or go out at all
until the C is all gone. One shot creates an urgent desire
for another shot to maintain the high. But once the C is
out of your system, you forget all about it. There is no
habit to C.
Junk short-circuits sex. The drive to non-sexual sociability
comes from the same place sex comes from, so
when I have an H or M shooting habit I am non-sociable.
If someone wants to talk, O.K. But there is no drive to get
acquainted. When I come off the junk, I often run through
a period of uncontrolled sociability and talk to anyone who
will listen.
Junk takes everything and gives nothing but insurance
against junk sickness. Every now and then I took a good
look at the deal I was giving myself and decided to take the
cure. When you are getting plenty of junk, kicking looks
easy. You say, "I'm not getting any kick from the shots
any more. I might as well quit." But when you cut down
into junk sickness, the picture looks different.
During the year or so I was on the junk in Mexico, I
started the cure five times. I tried reducing the shots, I tried
the Chinese cure, but nothing worked.
After my Chinese fiasco, I made up some papers and
gave them to my wife to hide and dole out according to a
schedule. I had Ike help me make up the papers, but he
had an inaccurate mind, and his schedule was all top-heavy
on the beginning and suddenly ended with no reduction. So
I made up my own schedule. For a while I stayed with the
schedule, but I didn't have any real push. I got stuff from
Ike on the side and made excuses for the extra shots.
I knew that I did not want to go on taking junk. If I
could have made a single decision, I would have decided
no more junk ever. But when it came to the process of
quitting, I did not have the drive. It gave me a terrible
feeling of helplessness to watch myself break every schedule
I set up as though I did not have control over my
actions.
One morning in April, I woke up a little sick. I lay
there looking at shadows on the white plaster ceiling. I
remembered a long time ago when I lay in bed beside my
mother, watching lights from the street move across the
ceiling and down the walls. I felt the sharp nostalgia of
train whistles, piano music down a city street, burning
leaves.
A mild degree of junk sickness always brought me the
magic of childhood. "It never fails," I thought. "Just like a
shot. I wonder if all junkies score for this wonderful stuff."
I went into the bathroom to take a shot. I was a long
time hitting a vein. The needle clogged twice. Blood ran
down my arm. The junk spread through my body, an injection
of death. The dream was gone. I looked down at the
blood that ran from elbow to wrist. I felt a sudden pity for
the violated veins and tissue. Tenderly I wiped the blood
off my arm.
"I'm going to quit," I said aloud.
I made up a solution of hop and told Ike to stay away
for a few days. He said, "I hope you make it, kid. I hope
you get off. May I fall down and be paralyzed if I don't
mean it."
In forty-eight hours the backlog of morphine in my
body ran out. The solution barely cut the sickness. I drank
it all with two nembutals and slept several hours. When I
woke up, my clothes were soaked through with sweat. My
eyes were watering and smarting. My whole body felt itchy
and irritable. I twisted about on the bed, arching my back
and stretching my arms and legs. I drew my knees up, my
hands clasped between the thighs. The pressure of my
hands set off the hair trigger orgasm of junk sickness. I got
up and changed my underwear.
There was a little hop left in the bottle. I drank that,
went out and bought four tubes of codeine tablets. I took
the codeine with hot tea and felt better.
Ike told me. "You're taking it too fast. Let me mix up
a solution for you." I could hear him out in the kitchen
crooning over the mixture: "A little cinnamon in case he
starts to puke .. . a little sage for the shits ... some cloves
to clean the blood ..
I never tasted anything so awful, but the mixture leveled
off my sickness at a bearable point, so I felt a little
high all the time. I wasn't high on the hop; I was high on
withdrawal tone-up. Junk is an inoculation of death that
keeps the body in a condition of emergency. When the
junky is cut off, emergency reactions continue. Sensations
sharpen, the addict is aware of his visceral processes to an
uncomfortable degree, peristalsis and secretion go unchecked.
No matter what his actual age, the kicking addict
is liable to the emotional excesses of a child or an adolescent.
About the third day of using Ike's mixture, I started
drinking. I had never been able to drink before when I was
on the junk, or junk sick. But eating hop is different from
shooting the white stuff. You can mix hop and lush.
At first I started drinking at five in the afternoon.
After a week, l started drinking at eight in the morning,
stayed drunk all day and all night, and woke up drunk the
next morning.
Every morning when I woke up, I washed down
benzedrine, sanicin, and a piece of hop with black coffee
and a shot of tequila. Then I lay back and closed my eyes
and tried to piece together the night before and yesterday.
Often, I drew a blank from noon on. You sometimes wake
up from a dream and think, "Thank God, I didn't really do
that!" Reconstructing a period of blackout you think, "My
God, did I really do it?" The line between saying and
thinking is blurred. Did you say it or just think it?
After ten days of the cure I had deteriorated shockingly.
My clothes were spotted and stiff from the drinks I
had spilled all over myself. I never bathed. I had lost
weight, my hands shook, I was always spilling things,
knocking over chairs, and falling down. But I seemed to
have unlimited energy and a capacity for liquor I never
had before. My emotions spilled out everywhere. I was
uncontrollably sociable and would talk to anybody I could
pin down. I forced distastefully intimate confidences on
perfect strangers. Several times I made the crudest sexual
propositions to people who had given no hint of reciprocity.
Ike was around every few days. "I'm glad to see you
getting off, Bill. May I fall down and be paralyzed if I
don't mean it. But if you get too sick and start to puke --
here's five centogramos of M."
Ike took a severe view of my drinking. "You're drinking,
Bill. You're drinking and getting crazy. You look terrible.
You look terrible in your face. Better you should go
back to stuff than drink like this."
I was in a cheap cantina off Dolores Street, Mexico
City. I had been drinking for about two weeks. I was
sitting in a booth with three Mexicans, drinking tequila.
The Mexicans were fairly well dressed. One of them spoke
English. A middle-aged, heavy-set Mexican with a sad,
sweet face sang songs and played the guitar. He was sitting
at the end of a booth in a chair. I was glad the singing
made conversation impossible.
Five cops came in. I figured I might get a shake, so I
slipped the gun and holster out of my belt and dropped
them under the table with a piece of hop I had stashed in a
cigarette package. The cops had a quick beer and took
off.
When I reached under the table, my gun was gone but
the holster was there.
I was sitting in another bar with the Mexican who
spoke English. The singer and the other two Mexicans
were gone. The place was suffused with a dim yellow light.
A moldy-looking bullhead mounted on a plaque hung over
the mahogany bar. Pictures of bullfighters, some autographed,
decorated the walls. The word "saloon" was
etched in the frosted-glass swinging door. I found myself
reading the word "saloon" over and over. I had the feeling
of coming into the middle of a conversation.
I inferred from the expression of the other man that I
was in mid-sentence, but did not know what I had said or
what I was going to say or what the discussion was about.
I thought we must be talking about the gun. "I am probably
trying to buy it back." I noticed the man had the piece
of hop in his hand, and was turning it over.
"So you think I look like a junky?" he said.
I looked at him. The man had a thin face with high
cheekbones. The eyes were a gray-brown color often seen
in mixed Indian and European stock. He was wearing a
light gray suit and a tie. His mouth was thin, twisted down
at the corners. A junky mouth, for sure. There are people
who look like junkies and aren't, just as some people look
queer and aren't. It's a type that causes trouble.
"I'm going to call a cop," he said, starting for a phone
attached to a support pillar.
I jerked the telephone out of the man's hand and
pushed him against the bar so hard he bounced off it. The
man smiled at me. His teeth were covered with a brown
film. He turned his back and called the bartender over and
showed him the piece of hop. I walked out and got a
cab.
I remember going back to my apartment to get another
gun -- a heavy-caliber revolver. I was in a hysterical
rage, though exactly why I cannot, in retrospect, understand.
I got out of a taxi and walked down the street and
into the bar. The man was leaning against the bar, his gray
coat pulled tight over his thin back and shoulders. He
turned an expressionless face to me.
I said, "Walk outside ahead of me."
"Why, Bill?" he asked.
"Go on, walk."
I flipped the heavy revolver out of my waistband,
cocking it as I drew, and stuck the muzzle in the man's
stomach. With my left hand, I took hold of the man's coat
lapel and shoved him back against the bar. It did not occur
to me until later that the man had used my correct first
name and that the bartender probably knew it too.
The man was perfectly relaxed, his face blank with
controlled fear. I saw someone approaching from behind
on my right side, and half turned my head. The bartender
was closing in with a cop. I turned around, irritated at the
interruption. I shoved the gun in the cop's stomach.
"Who asked you to put in your two cents?" I asked in
English. I was not talking to a solid three-dimensional cop.
I was talking to the recurrent cop of my dreams -- an irritating,
nondescript, darkish man who would rush in when
I was about to take a shot or go to bed with a boy.
The bartender grabbed my arm, twisting it to one side
out of the cop's stomach. The cop stolidly hauled out his
battered .45 automatic, placing it firmly against my body. I
could feel the coldness of the muzzle through my thin
cotton shirt. The cop's stomach stuck out. He had not
sucked it in or leaned forward. I relaxed my hold on the
gun and felt it leave my hand. I half-raised my hands, palm
out in a gesture of surrender.
"All right, all right," I said, and then added, "bueno."
The cop put away his .45. The bartender was leaning
against the bar examining the gun. The man in the gray
Suit stood there without any expression at all.
"Esta cargado," -- ( "It's loaded") -- said the bartender,
without looking up from the gun.
I intended to say, "Of course -- what good is an unloaded
gun?" but I did not say anything. The scene was
unreal and flat and pointless, as though I had forced my
way into someone else's dream, the drunk wandering out
onto the stage.
And I was unreal to the others, the stranger from
another country. The bartender looked at me with curiosity.
He gave a little shrug of puzzled disgust and slipped the
gun into his waistband. There was no hate in the room.
Perhaps they would have hated me if I had been closer to
them.
The cop took me firmly by the arm. "Vmonos
gringo," he said.
I walked out with the cop. I felt limp and had difficulty
controlling my legs. Once I stumbled, and the cop
steadied me. I was trying to convey the idea that, while I
had no money on my person, I could borrow some "de
amigos." My brain was numb. I mixed Spanish and English
and the word for borrow was hidden in some filing
cabinet of the mind cut off from my use by the mechanical
barrier of alcohol-numbed connections. The cop shook his
head. I was making an effort to reform the concept. Suddenly
the cop stopped walking.
"Andale, gringo," he said, giving me a slight push on
the shoulder. The cop stood there for a minute, watching
me as I walked on down the street. I waved. The cop did
not respond. He turned and walked back the way he had
come.
I had one peso left. I walked into a cantina and ordered
a beer. There was no draft beer and bottle beer cost
a peso. There was a group of young Mexicans at the end of
the bar, and I got to talking to them. One of them showed
me a Secret Service badge. Probably a phony, I decided.
There's a phony cop in every Mexican bar. I found myself
drinking a tequila. The last thing I remembered was the
sharp taste of the lemon I sucked with the glass of tequila.
I woke up next morning in a strange room. I looked
around. Cheap joint. Five pesos. A wardrobe, a chair, a
table. I could see people passing outside, through the
drawn curtains. Ground floor. Some of my clothes were
heaped on the chair. My coat and shirt lay on the table.
I swung my legs Out of the bed, and sat there trying to
remember what happened after that last glass of tequila. I
drew a blank. I got out of bed and took inventory of my
effects. "Fountain pen gone. It leaked anyway . . . never
had one that didn't... pocketknife gone.. . no loss either
." I began putting on my clothes. I had the shakes bad.
"Need a few quick beers . .. maybe I can catch Rollins
home now."
It was a long walk. Rollins was in front of his apartment,
walking his Norwegian elk-hound. He was a solidly
built man of my age, with strong, handsome features and
wiry, black hair a little gray at the temples. He was wearing
an expensive sports coat, whipcord slacks, and a suede
leather jacket. We had known each other for thirty years.
Rollins listened to my account of the previous evening.
"You're going to get your head blown off carrying
that gun," he said. "What do you carry it for? You
wouldn't know what you were shooting at. You bumped
into trees twice there on Insurgentes. You walked right in
front of a car. I pulled you back and you threatened me. I
left you there to find your own way home, and I don't
know how you ever made it. Everyone is fed up with the
way you've been acting lately. If there's one thing I don't
want to be around, and I think no one else particularly
wants to be around, it's a drunk with a gun."
"You're right, of course," I said.
"Well, I want to help you in any way I can. But the
first thing you have to do is cut down on the sauce and
build up your.health. You look terrible. Then you'd better
think about making some money. Speaking of money, I
guess you're broke, as usual." Rollins took out his wallet.
"Here's fifty pesos. That's the best I can do for you."
I got drunk on the fifty pesos. About nine that night, I
ran out of money and went back to my apartment. I lay
down and tried to sleep. When I closed my eyes I saw an
Oriental face, the lips and nose eaten away by disease. The
disease spread, melting the face into an amoeboid mass in
which the eyes floated, dull crustacean eyes. Slowly, a new
face formed around the eyes. A series of faces, hieroglyphs,
distorted and leading to the final place where the
human road ends, where the human form can no longer
contain the crustacean horror that has grown inside it.
I watched curiously. "I got the horrors," I thought
matter of factly.
I woke up with a start of fear. I lay there, my heart
beating fast, trying to find out what had scared me. I
thought I heard a slight noise downstairs. "There is someone
in the apartment," I said aloud, and immediately I
knew that there was.
I took my 30-30 carbine out of the closet. My hands
were shaking; I could barely load the rifle. I dropped several
cartridges on the floor before I got two in the loading
slot. My legs kept folding under me. I went downstairs and
turned on all the lights. Nobody. Nothing.
I had the shakes bad, and on top of that I was junk
sick! "How long since I've had a shot?" I asked myself. I
couldn't remember. I began ransacking the apartment for
junk. Some time before, I had stashed a piece of hop in a
hole in one corner of the room. The hop had slid under the
floorboards, out of reach. I had made several abortive attempts
to recover it.
"I'll get it this time," I said grimly. With shaking
hands, I made a hook out of a coat-hanger and began
fishing for the hop. The sweat ran down my nose. I
skinned my hands on the jagged wood edges of the hole.
"If I can't get to it one way, I will another," I said grimly,
and began looking for the saw.
I couldn't find it. I rushed from one room to the
other, throwing things around and emptying drawers on
the floor in a mounting frenzy. Sobbing with rage, I tried
to rip the boards up with my hands. Finally, I gave up and
lay on the floor panting and whimpering.
I remembered there was some dionin in the medicine
chest. I got up to look. Only one tablet left. The tablet
cooked up milky and I was afraid to shoot it in the vein. A
sudden involuntary jerk of my hand pulled the needle out
of my arm and the shot sprayed over my skin. I sat there
looking at my arm.
I finally slept a little and woke up next morning with a
terrific alcohol depression. Junk sickness, suspended by
codeine and hop, numbed by weeks of constant drinking,
came back on me full force. "I have to have some codeine,"
I thought.
I looked through my clothes. Nothing, not a cigarette,
not a centavo. I went into the living room and reached into
the sofa, where the sofa back joined the seat. I ran my
hand along it. A comb, a piece of chalk, a broken pencil,
one ten-centavo piece, one five. I felt a sickening shock of
pain and pulled my hand out. I was bleeding from a deep
cut in my finger. A razor blade, evidently. I tore off a piece
of towel and wrapped it around my finger. The blood
soaked through and dripped on the floor. I went back to
bed. I couldn't sleep. I couldn't read. I lay there looking at
the ceiling, stoically.
A matchbox sailed past the door into the bathroom. I
sat up, my heart pounding. "Old Ike, the pusher!" Ike
often sneaked into the house and manifested his presence
like a poltergeist, throwing something or knocking on the
walls. Old Ike appeared in the doorway.
"How you getting along?" he asked.
"Not so good. I got the shakes: I need a shot."
Ike nodded. "Yeah," he began, "M is the thing for- the
shakes. I remember once in Minneapolis -- "
"Never mind Minneapolis. Have you got any?"
"I got it, but not with me. Take me about twenty
minutes to get it." Old Ike was sitting down, leafing
through a magazine. He looked up. "Why? You want
some?"
"Yes."
"I'll get it right away." Ike was gone two hours.
"I had to wait for the guy to get back from lunch to
open the safe in the hotel. I keep my stuff in the safe so
nobody makes me for it. I tell `em at the hotel it's gold dust
I use -- "
"But you got it?"
"Yes, I got it. Where is your works?"
"In the bathroom."
Ike came back from the bathroom with the works and
began cooking up a shot. He kept talking. "You're drinking
and you're getting crazy. I hate to see you get off this stuff
and on something worse. I know so many that quit the
junk. A lot of them can't make it with Lupita. Fifteen
pesos for a paper and it takes three to fix you. Right away
they start drinking and they don't last more than two or
three years."
"Let's have that shot," I said.
"Yes. Just a minute. The needle is stopped." Ike began
feeling along the edge of his coat lapel, looking for a
horsehair to clean out the needle. He went on talking: "I
remember once out by Mary Island. We was on the boat
and the Colonel got drunk and fell in the water and come
near drowning with his two pistolas. We had a hell of a
time to get him out." Ike blew through the needle. "Clear
now. I see a guy used to be a hip down by Lupita's. They
called him El Sombrero because he makes it grabbing peoples'
hats and running. Comes up by a streetcar just when
it starts. Reaches in and grabs a hat and -- pfut -- he's gone.
You should see him now. His legs all swelled up and covered
with sores and dirty, oh my God! The people walk
around him like this." Ike was standing with the dropper in
one hand and the needle in the other.
I said, "How about that shot?"
"O.K. How much you want? About five Centogramos?
Better make it five."
The shot was a long time taking effect. It hit Slowly at
first, then with mounting force. I lay back on the bed like I
was in a warm bath.
I kept on drinking. Several days later, I passed out in
the Ship Ahoy after drinking tequila for eight hours steadily.
Some friends carried me home. Next morning I had the
worst hangover of my life. I began vomiting at ten-minute
intervals until I brought up green bile.
Then Old Ike was around. "You got to quit drinking,
Bill. You're getting crazy."
I had never been so sick. Nausea wracked my body
like a convulsion. Old Ike was holding me up as I vomited
a few spoonfuls of bile into the toilet. He put an arm
around my shoulder and hugged me and helped me back to
bed. About five in the afternoon, I stopped vomiting and
managed to keep a bottle of grape juice and a glass of milk
down.
"It stinks like piss in here," I said. "One of them cats
must have pissed under the bed."
Ike began sniffing around the bed. "No, nothing
there." He sniffed some more near the head of the bed,
where I was lying propped up on pillows. "Bill, it's you
smells like piss!"
"Huh?" I began smelling my hands, with mounting
horror as if I was discovering leprosy. "Good Lord!" I said,
my stomach cold with fear. "I got uremic poisoning! Ike,
go out and get me a croaker."
"0K., Bill, I'll get you one right away."
"And don't come back with one of them five-peso
script-writing bums!"
"O.K., Bill."
I lay there trying to control the fear. I did not know
much about uremic poisoning. A woman I'd known
slightly in Texas had died of it after drinking a bottle of
beer every hour, night and day, for two weeks. Rollins had
told me about it. "She swelled up and turned sorta black
and went into convulsions and died. The whole house
smelled like piss!"
I relaxed, trying to tune in on my viscera and find out
what the score was. I did not feel death or indication of
grave illness. I felt tired, battered, languid. I lay there with
my eyes closed in the darkening room.
Old Ike came in with a doctor and turned on the light.
A Chinese doctor -- one of Ike's script-writers. He said
there was no uremia since I could piss and did not have a
headache.
I asked, "How come I stink like this?"
The doctor shrugged. Ike said, "He says it's nothing
serious. He says you have to stop drinking. He says better
you go back to the other than drink like this." The doctor
nodded. I could hear Ike out in the hail, hitting the croaker
for a morphine script.
"Ike, I don't think that doctor knows a thing. I want
you to do this. Co to my friend Rollins -- I'll write down
his address -- and ask him to send me over a good doctor.
He will know because his wife has been sick."
"Well, all right," said Ike. "But I think you're wasting
your money. This doctor is pretty good."
"Yeah, he's got a good writing arm.
Ike laughed and shrugged. "All right."
He was back in an hour with Rollins and another
doctor. When they walked into the apartment, the doctor
sniffed and smiled and, turning to Rollins, nodded. He had
a round, smiling, Oriental face. He made a quick examination
and asked if I could urinate. Then, turning to Ike, he
asked if I was subject to fits.
Ike told me, "He ask if you are ever crazy. I tell him,
no you just play with the cat some time."
Rollins spoke in his halting Spanish, looking for each
word. "Esto seor huele muy malo and quiere saber por
que." ("This man smells very bad and he wants to know
why.")
The doctor explained it was an incipient uremia, but
the danger was now past. I would have to stop drinking for
a month. The doctor picked up an empty tequila bottle.
"One more of these and you were dead." He was putting
away his instruments. He wrote out a prescription for an
anti-acid preparation to take every few hours, shook hands
with me and Ike, and left.
Next day I had the chucks and ate everything in sight.
I stayed in bed three days. The metabolic setup of alcoholism
had ceased operating. When I started drinking again, I
drank normally and never before the late afternoon. I
stayed off the junk.
At that time, the G.I. students patronized Lola's during
the daytime and the Ship Ahoy at night. Lola's was not
exactly a bar. It was a small beer and soda joint. There was
a boxful of beer and soda and ice at the left of the door as
you came in. A counter with tube metal stools, covered in
yellow glazed leather, ran down one side of the room as far
as the jukebox. Tables were lined along the wall opposite
the counter. The stools had long since lost the rubber caps
for the legs and made a horrible screeching noise when the
maid pushed them around to sweep. There was a kitchen in
back, where a slovenly cook fried everything in rancid fat.
There was neither past nor future in Lola's. The place was
a waiting room.
I was sitting in Lola's reading the papers. After a
while I put the paper down and looked around. At the next
table somebody was talking about lobotomy. "They sever
the nerves." At another table two young men were trying
to make time with some Mexican girls. "Mi amigo es muy,
muy. . ." He was looking for a word. The girls giggled.
The conversations had a nightmare flatness, talking dice
spilled in the tube metal chairs, human aggregates dis.
integrating in cosmic insanity, random events in a dying
universe.
I had been off junk two months. When you quit junk,
everything seems flat, but you remember the shot schedule,
the static honor of junk, your life draining into your arm
three times a day.
I picked up a comic section from the next table. It
was two days old. I put it down. Nothing to do. No place
to go. My wife was in Acapulco. I started back to my
apartment, and spotted Old Ike a block away.
Some people you can spot as far as you can see;
others you can't be sure of until you are close enough to
touch them. Junkies are mostly in sharp focus. There had
been a time when my blood pressure rose with pleasure at
the sight of Old Ike. When you are on the junk, the pusher
is like the loved one to the lover. You wait for his special
step in the hail, his special knock, you scan the approaching
faces on a city street. You can hallucinate every detail
of his appearance as though he were standing there in the
doorway, going into the old pusher joke: "Sorry to disappoint
you, but I couldn't score." Watching the play of hope
and anxiety on the other's face, savoring the feel of benevolent
power, the power to give or withhold. Pat in New
Orleans always pulled that routine. Bill Gains in New
York. Old Ike would swear he didn't have anything, then
slip the paper in my pocket and say, "Look, you had some
all the time."
But I was off the junk now. Still a shot of morphine
would be nice later when I was ready to sleep, or, better, a
speedball, half cocaine, half morphine. I overtook Ike at
the door of the apartment. I dropped a hand on his shoulder
and he turned, his toothless, old-woman, junky face
breaking into a smile as he recognized me.
"Hello," he said.
"Haven't seen you in a dog's age," I said. "Where you
been?"
He laughed. "!was in the can," he said. "Anyway, I
didn't want to come around because I knew you was off.
You off completely?"
"Yeah, I'm off."
"You wouldn't want a shot, then?" Old Ike was smiling.
"Well . . ." I felt a touch of the old excitement like
meeting someone you used to go to bed with and suddenly
the excitement is there and you both know that you are
going to go to bed again.
Ike made a deprecatory gesture. "I got about ten
centogramos here. Not enough to do me any good. Cot a
little coke, too."
"Come on in," I said.
I opened the door. The apartment was dark and
musty. Clothes, books, newspapers, dirty plates and glasses
were scattered around on chairs and tables and on the dirty
floor. I pushed a stack of magazines off a ratty-looking
couch.
"Sit down," I said. "You got the stuff on you?"
"Yeah, I got it planted." He opened his fly and extracted
a rectangular paper packet -- the junky fold, with
one end fitting into another. Inside the packet were two
smaller packets, each similarly folded. He placed the papers
on the table. He watched me with his bright brown
eyes. His mouth, toothless and tightly closed, gave the impression
of being sewed together.
I went into the bathroom to get my works. Needle,
dropper, and a piece of cotton. I fished a teaspoon out of a
pile of dirty dishes in the kitchen sink. Ole Ike tore a long
strip of paper and wet it with his mouth and wrapped it
around the end of the dropper. He fitted the needle on over
the wet paper collar. He opened one of the papers, with
care not to flip the contents out by a spring motion of the
waxed paper.
"This is the coke," he said. "Be careful, it's strong
stuff."
I emptied the morphine paper into the spoon, adding
a little water. About half a grain, I figured. Nearer four
centogramos than ten. I held a match under the spoon
until the morphine dissolved. You never heat coke. I added
a little coke on the end of a knife blade and the coke
dissolved instantly, like snow hitting water. I wrapped a
frayed tie around my arm. My breath was short with excitement
and my hands shook.
"Hit me, will you, Ike?"
Old Ike poked a gentle finger along the vein, holding
the dropper poised between thumb and fingers. Ike was
good. I hardly felt the needle slide in the vein. Dark, red
blood spurted into the dropper.
"O.K.," he said. "Let it go."
I loosened the tie, and the dropper emptied into my
vein. Coke hit my head, a pleasant dizziness and tension,
while the morphine spread through my body in relaxing
waves.
"Was that all right?" asked Ike, smiling.
"If God made anything better, he kept it for Himself7"
I said.
Ike was cleaning out the needle, squirting water
through it. "Well," he said inanely, "when the roll is called
up yonder we'll be there, right?"
I sat down on the couch and lit a cigarette. Old Ike
went Out into the kitchen to make a cup of tea. He began
another installment in the endless saga of the Black Bastard.
"The Black Bastard is putting out to three guys now.
Pickpockets, all three of them, and they make pretty good
in the market. Pay off the cops. He gives about four
centogramos in a shot for fifteen pesos. He don't want to
talk to me now he's doing good, the dirty bastard. He
won't last a month, you wait and see. First time one of
those guys gets caught he's going to stool like that!" He
came to the kitchen door and snapped his fingers. "He
won't last a month." His toothless mouth was twisted with
hate.
When I jumped bail and left the States, the heat on
junk already looked like something new and special. Initial
symptoms of nationwide hysteria were clear. Louisiana
passed a law making it a crime to be a drug addict. Since
no place or time is specified and the term "addict" is not
clearly defined, no proof is necessary or even relevant
under a law so formulated. No proof, and consequently, no
trial. This is police-state legislation penalizing a state of
being. Other states were emulating Louisiana. I saw my
chance of escaping Conviction dwindle daily as the antijunk
feeling mounted to a paranoid obsession, like anti-
Semitism under the Nazis. So I decided to jump bail and
live permanently outside the United States.
Safe in Mexico, I watched the anti-junk campaign. I
read about child addicts and Senators demanding the death
penalty for dope peddlers. It didn't sound right to me. Who
wants kids for customers? They never have enough money
and they always spill under questioning. Parents find out
the kid is on junk and go to the law. I figured that either
Stateside peddlers have gone simpleminded or the whole
child-addict setup is a routine to stir up anti-junk sentiment
and pass some new laws.
Refugee hipsters trickled down into Mexico. "Six
months for needle marks under the vag-addict law in California."
"Eight years for a dropper in Washington." "Two
to ten for selling in New York." A group of young hipsters
dropped by my place every day to smoke weed.
There was Cash, a musician who played trumpet.
There was Pete, a heavy-set blond, who could have modeled
for a clean-cut American Boy poster. There was
Johnny White, who had a wife and three children and
looked like any average young American. There was Martin,
a dark, good-looking kid of Italian stock. No zootsuiters.
The hipster has gone underground.
I learned the new hipster vocabulary: "pot" for weed,
"twisted" for busted, "cool," an all-purpose word indicating
anything you like or any situation that is not hot with the
law. Conversely, anything you don't like is "uncool." From
listening to these characters, I got a picture of the situation
in the U.S. A state of complete chaos where you never
know who is who or where you stand. Old-time junkies
told me: "If you ever see a man take a shot in the arm, you
know be is not a Federal agent."
This is no longer true. Martin told me: "This cat fell
in and says he's sick. He had the names of some friends of
ours in `Frisco. So these two other cats turned him on H
and he was fixing right with them for over a week. And
then they got busted. I wasn't along when it happened
because I didn't dig this cat and I wasn't on H at the time.
So the lawyer for these two cats that got twisted found out
the cat was a Federal narcotics agent. An agent, not a
pigeon. Even found out his name."
And Cash told me of cases where two hips take a fix
together and then one pulls out his badge.
"How can you beat it?" Cash said. "I mean these guys
are hips themselves. Guys just like you and me with one
small difference -- they work for Uncle."
Now that the Narcotics Bureau has taken it upon
itself to incarcerate every addict in the U.S., they need
more agents to do the work. Not only more agents, but a
different type of agent. Like during prohibition, when
bums and hoodlums flooded the Internal Revenue Department,
now addict-agents join the department for free junk
and immunity. It is difficult to fake addiction. An addict
knows an addict. The addict-agents manage to conceal
their addiction, or, perhaps, they are tolerated because they
get results. An agent who has to connect or go sick Wilt
bring a special zeal to his work.
Cash, the trumpet player, who did six months on the
vag-addict rap, was a tall, skinny young man with a ragged
goatee and dark glasses. He wore shoes with thick crepe
leather soles, expensive camel-hair shirts, and a leather
jacket you tie with a belt in front. You could see he had
about a hundred dollars in haberdashery on his person. His
old lady had the money and Cash was spending it. When I
met him, the money was about gone. Cash told me:
"Women come to me. I don't care about women. The only
thing gives me a real kick is playing trumpet."
Cash was a junk mooch on wheels. He made it difficult
to refuse. He would lend me small amounts of money
-- never enough to cover the junk he used -- and then say
he had given me all his money and had no money left to
buy codeine pills. He told me he was getting off the junk.
When he arrived in Mexico, I gave him half a grain of M
and he went on the nod. I guess the stuff they sell now
Stateside is cut tight down to the paper.
After that, he would drop around every day and ask
me for "half a fix." Or he would mooch junk off Old Ike,
who couldn't turn down anyone sick. I told Old Ike to
pack him in, and explained to Cash I wasn't in the junk
business, and Old Ike wasn't really in the business either.
Certainly he wasn't in the business for nothing. In short,
we were not the junkies' benevolent society. From then on,
I didn't see much of Cash.
Peyote is a new kick in the States. It isn't under the
Harrison Act, and you can buy it from herb dealers
through the mail. I had never tried peyote, and I asked
Johnny White if he could score for peyote in Mexico.
He said, "Yes. An herb dealer here sells it. He invited
all of us to come to his place and eat peyote with him. You
can come along if you like. I want to see if he has anything
I can take back to the States and sell there."
"Why not take back peyote?"
"It doesn't keep. it rots or dries up in a few days and
loses its kick." We went to the herb dealer's house and he
brought out a bowl of peyote, a grater and a pot of tea.
Peyote is a small cactus and only the top part that
appears above the ground is eaten. This is called a button.
The buttons are prepared by peeling off the bark and fuzz
and running the button through a grater until it looks like
avocado salad. Four buttons is the average dose for a beginner.
We washed down the peyote with tea. I came near
gagging on it several times. Finally I got it all down and sat
there waiting for something to happen. The herb dealer
brought out some bark he claimed was like opium. Johnny
rolled a cigarette of the stuff and passed it around. Pete
and Johnny said, "Crazy! This is the greatest."
I smoked some and felt a little dizzy and my throat
hurt. But Johnny bought some of that awful-smelling bark
with the intention of selling it to desperate hipsters in the
U.S.
After ten minutes I began to feel sick from the peyote.
Everyone told me, "Keep it down, man." I held out ten
minutes more, then headed for the W.C. ready to throw in
the towel, but I couldn't vomit. My whole body contracted
in a convulsive spasm, but the peyote wouldn't come up. It
wouldn't stay down either.
Finally, the peyote came up solid like a ball of hair,
solid all the way up, clogging my throat. As horrible a
sensation as I ever stood still for. After that, the high came
on slow.
Peyote high is something like benzedrine high. You
can't sleep and your pupils are dilated. Everything looks
like a peyote plant. I was driving in the car with the Whites
and Cash and Pete. We were going out to Cash's place in
the Lamas. Johnny said, "Look at the bank along the road.
It looks like a peyote plant."
I turned around to look, and was thinking, "What a
damn silly idea. People can talk themselves into anything."
But it did look like a peyote plant. Everything I saw looked
like a peyote plant.
Our faces swelled under the eyes and our lips got
thicker through some glandular action of the drug. We
actually looked like Indians. The others claimed they felt
primitive and were laying around on the grass and acting
the way they figured Indians act. I didn't feel any different
from ordinary except high like on benny.
We sat up all night talking and listening to Cash's
records. Cash told me about several cats from `Frisco who
had kicked junk habits with peyote. "It seems like they
didn't want junk when they started using peyote." One of
these junkies came down to Mexico and started taking
peyote with the Indians. He was using it all the time in
large quantities: up to twelve buttons in one dose. He died
of a condition that was diagnosed as polio. I understand,
however, that the symptoms of peyote poisoning and polio
are identical.
I couldn't sleep until the next morning at dawn, and
then I had a nightmare every time I dozed off. In one
dream, I was coming down with rabies. I looked in the
mirror and my face changed and I began howling. In another
dream, I had a chlorophyll habit. Me and about five
other chlorophyll addicts are waiting to score on the landing
of a cheap Mexican hotel. We turn green and no one
can kick a chlorophyll habit. One shot and you're hung for
life. We are turning into plants.
The young hipsters seem Jacking in energy and spontaneous
enjoyment of life. The mention of pot or junk will
galvanize them like a shot of coke. They jump around and
say, "Too much! Man, let's pick up! Let's get loaded." But
after a shot, they slump into a chair like a resigned baby
waiting for life to bring the bottle again.
I found that their interests were very limited. Particularly,
I noticed they seemed less interested in sex than my
generation. Some of them expressed themselves as not getting
any kick out of sex at all. I have frequently been
misled to believe a young man was queer after observing
his indifference to women, and found out subsequently he
was not at all homosexual, but simply disinterested in the
whole subject.
Bill Gains threw in the towel and moved to Mexico. I
met him at the airport. He was loaded on H and goof balls.
His pants were spotted with blood where he had been
fixing on the plane with a safety pin. You make a hole with
the pin, and put the dropper over (not in) the hole, and
the solution goes right in. With this method, you don't
need a needle, but it takes an old-time junky to make it
work. You have to use exactly the right degree of pressure
feeding in the solution. I tried it once and the junk squirted
out to the side and I lost it all. But when Gains made a
hole in his flesh, the hole stayed open waiting for junk.
Bill was an old-timer. He knew everybody in the business.
He had an excellent reputation and he could score as
long as anyone sold junk. I figured the situation must be
desperate when Bill packed in and left the States.
"Sure, I can score," he told me. "But if I stay in the
States I'll wind up doing about ten years."
I took a shot with him, and the what-happened-to-soand-
so routine set in.
"Old Bart died on the Island. Louie the Bell Hop went
wrong. Tony and Nick went wrong. Herman didn't make
parole. The Gimp got five to ten. Marvin the waiter died
from an overdose."
I remembered the way Marvin used to pass out every
time he took a shot. I could see him lying on the bed in
some cheap hotel, the dropper full of blood hanging to his
vein like a glass leech, his face turning blue around the
lips.
"What about Roy?" I asked.
"Didn't you hear about him? He went wrong and
hanged himself in the Tombs." It seems the law had Roy
on three counts, two larceny, one narcotics. They promised
to drop all charges if Roy would set up Eddie Crump, an
old-time pusher. Eddie only served people he knew well,
and he knew Roy. The law double-crossed Roy after they
got Eddie. They dropped the narcotics charge, but not the
two larceny charges. So Roy was slated to follow Eddie up
to Riker's Island, where Eddie was doing pen indefinite,
which is maximum in City Prison. Three years, five
months, and six days. Roy hanged himself in the Tombs,
where he was awaiting transfer to Riker's.
Roy had always taken an intolerant and puritanical
view of pigeons. "I don't see how a pigeon can live with
himself," he said to me once.
I asked Bill about child addicts. He nodded and
smiled, a sly gloating smile. "Yes, Lexington is full of
young kids now.
One day I was in the Opera Bar in Mexico City and
ran into a politician I knew. He was standing at the bar
with a napkin tucked in his collar, eating a steak. Between
mouthfuls he asked me did I know anyone who might be
interested to buy an ounce of heroin.
I said, "Maybe. How much?"
He said, "They want five hundred dollars."
I talked to Bill Gains and he said, "All right. If it's
anywhere near pure I'll take it. But no sight unseen. I have
to try the stuff first."
So I arranged it with the politician and we went down
to his office. He brought the stuff out of a drawer in a
finger stall and laid it on the desk beside a .45 automatic.
"I don't know anything about this stuff," he said. "All
I use is cocaine."
I poured some out on a piece of paper. It didn't look
right to me. Sort of gray-black. I guess "they" had cooked
it up some place on a kitchen stove.
Gains took a shot, but he was so loaded already on
goof balls and M he couldn't tell one way or the other. So I
took a shot and told him, "It's H, but there's something not
exactly right about it."
People meanwhile were walking in and out of the
office. Nobody paid us any mind sitting there on the couch
with our sleeves rolled up, probing for veins with the
needle. Anything can happen in the office of a Mexican
politician.
Anyway Bill bought the H and I went somewhere and
didn't see him until next day, eleven o'clock on a bright
Mexican morning, standing by my bed, cadaverous in his
blue-black overcoat, his eyes brighter than I ever saw them,
gleaming in the darkness of the curtained room. He stood
there with the impurities of amateur H in his brain like
spirochetes.
"You just going to lie there on your bed?" he asked,
"With all these shipments coming in?"
"Why not?" I said, annoyed. "This isn't any fucking
farm . . . shipments of what?"
"Good, pure M," he said. Then shoes, overcoat and
all, he got right in bed with me.
"What's the matter with you?" I asked. "You crazy?"
And looking into his bright blank eyes I saw that he was.
I got him back to his room and confiscated what was
left of the piece of H.
Old Ike showed, and we poured ten centimeters of
laudanum down Bill's gullet. After that he stopped raving
about "shipments of good, pure M" and went to sleep.
"Maybe he die," Old Ike said, "and they blame it onto
me."
"If he dies you clear out," I said. "Listen. He's got six
hundred dollars cash in his wallet. Why leave it for some
Mexican cop to steal?"
We shook the place down looking for the wallet, but
could not find it. We looked everywhere except under the
mattress where Bill was lying.
Next day Bill was good as new, but he couldn't find
his money.
"You must have stashed it," I said. "Look under the
mattress."
He turned up the mattress and the wallet sprung open,
it was so full of crisp money.
At this time, I was not on junk, but I was a long way
from being clean in the event of an unforeseen shake.
There was always some weed around, and people were
using my place as a shooting gallery. I was taking chances
and not making one centavo. I decided it was about time to
move out from under and head south.
When you give up junk, you give up a way of life. I
have seen junkies kick and hit the lush and wind up dead
in a few years. Suicide is frequent among ex-junkies. Why
does a junky quit junk of his own will? You never know
the answer to that question. No conscious tabulation of the
disadvantages and horrors of junk gives you the emotional
drive to kick. The decision to quit junk is a cellular decision,
and once you have decided to quit you cannot go
back to junk permanently any more than you could stay
away from it before. Like a man who has been away a long
time, you see things different when you return from junk.
I read about a drug called yage, used by Indians in the
headwaters of the Amazon. Yage is supposed to increase
telepathic sensitivity. A Colombian scientist isolated from
yage a drug he called telepathine.
I know from my own experience that telepathy is a
fact. I have no interest in proving telepathy or anything to
anybody. I do want usable knowledge of telepathy. What I
look for in any relationship is contact on the nonverbal
level of intuition and feeling, that is, telepathic contact.
Apparently, I am not the only one interested in yage.
The Russians are using this drug in experiments on slave
labor. They want to induce states of automatic obedience
and literal thought control. The basic con. No build-up, no
routine, just move in on someone's psyche and give orders.
The deal is certain to backfire because telepathy is not in
itself a one-way setup, or a setup of sender and receiver at
all.
I decided to go down to Colombia and score for yage.
Bill Gains is squared away with Old Ike. My wife and I are
separated. I am ready to move on south and look for the
uncut kick that opens out instead of narrowing down like
junk.
Kick is seeing things from a special angle. Kick is
momentary freedom from the claims of the aging, cautious,
nagging, frightened flesh. Maybe I will find in yage
what I was looking for in junk and weed and coke. Yage
may be the final fix.
glossary
"Jive talk" is used more in connection with marijuana
than with junk. In the past few years, however, the use of
junk has spread into "hip," or "jive talking" circles, and
junk lingo has, to some extent, merged with "jive talk."
For example, "Are you anywhere?" can mean "Do you
have any junk or weed on your person?" Jive talk always
refers to more than one level of fact. "Are you anywhere?"
can also refer to your psychic condition: "Are you holding
psychically?"
Are you anywhere? Are you holding? . . . Do you have
any junk or weed on you?
Beat. . . To take someone's money. For example, addict A
says he will buy junk for addict B but keeps the money
instead. Addict A has "beat" addict B for the money.
Benny. . . Benzedrine. It can also mean overcoat.
Bring down, Drag. . . The opposite of high. Depressing.
Brown Stuff, or Mud. . . Opium
Burn Down . . . To overdo or run into the ground. Certain
restaurants are used so much by junkies as meeting-
places that the restaurant gets known to the police.
Then the restaurant is "burned down."
Burning Down Habit, an Oil Burner Habit . . . A heavy
habit.
C, Coke, Charge, Charly . . . Cocaine.
Caps . . . Capsules of heroin.
Cat . . . A man.
Chick . . . A woman.
Chucks . . . Excessive hunger, often for sweets. This comes
on an addict when he has kicked his habit far enough
so that he starts to eat. When an addict is cut off the
junk, he can't eat for several days. I have seen addicts
who did not eat for a month. Then he gets the "chucks"
and eats everything in sight.
Clean . . . A user is clean if he does not have any junk on
his person or premises in the event of a search by the
law.
Cold Turkey . . . To quit using suddenly and completely
with no gradual reduction of the dose. Almost always
involuntary.
Collar. . . Strip of paper wrapped around a dropper to
make a tight fit with a needle.
Come on . . . The way someone acts, his general manner
and way of approaching others.
Come up
. . . A lush waking up while he is being robbed.
Cook . . . To dissolve junk in water heated in a spoon or
other container.
Cop. . . To pass a cap of junk to someone; to hold oat a
hand for a cap.
Copper Jitters . . . Exaggerated fear of cops. When you
have the Copper Jitters, everybody looks like a cop.
Croaker. . . A doctor.
Dig . . . To size up, to understand, to like, or enjoy.
Fey . . . White.
Five-Twenty-Nine . . . Five months and twenty-nine days.
This is the term in the workhouse that a lush-worker receives
for "jostling." If a detective sees a lush-worker
approach or touch a lush, he places a "jostling" charge.
Flop . . . Drunk passed out on a subway station bench.
C . . . One grain. Morphine is the standard for junk
measurement. One-half grain of morphine is one "fix."
A capsule of heroin should contain at least the equivalent
of 34 grain of morphine. Heroin is seven times as
strong as morphine.
Gold . . . Money.
H, Horse, Henry . . . Heroin.
Habit . . . A junk habit, it takes at least a month of daily
use to get a needle habit, two months for a smoking
habit, four months for an eating habit.
Heavy. . . Junk, as opposed to marijuana.
Hep or Hip. . . Someone who knows the score. Someone
who understands "jive talk." Someone who is "with it."
The expression is not subject to definition because, if
you don't "dig" what it means, no one can ever tell you.
High . . . Feeling good, in a state of euphoria. You can be
"high" on benny, weed, lush, nutmeg, ammonia (The
Scrubwoman's Kick). You can be high without any
chemical boot, just feeling good.
Hog . . . Anyone who uses more junk than you do. To use
over five grains per day puts a user in the hog class.
Hook . . . Lush-workers usually work in pairs. One lushworker
covers his partner with a newspaper, while the
other goes through the lush's pockets. The one who
covers the other is the "hook."
Hooked . . . To get a habit.
Hot, Uncool . . Somebody liable to attract attention
from the law. A place watched by the law.
Hot Shot . . . Poison, usually strychnine, passed to an addict
as junk. The peddler sometimes slips a hot shot to
an addict because the addict is giving information to
the law.
The Hype, The Bill. . . A short-change racket.
John. . . Someone who keeps a woman and spends money
on her.
Joy Bang . . . An occasional shot by someone who does
not have a habit.
Kick . . . A word with several meanings. It can mean the
effect of a drug or a mood brought on by some place,
or person. "This bar gives me bad kicks." "This bar
depresses me." You can also be on "good kicks." A kick
is also a special way of looking at things so that the
man who is "on kicks" sees things from a special angle.
Kick a Habit . . . To quit using junk and get over a habit.
Lay on . . . Give.
Loaded, On the Nod . . . Full of junk.
Lush-Worker. . . A thief who specializes in robbing drunks
on the subway.
M., M.S. . . . Morphine, M.S. stands for Morphine Sulphate
which is the morphine salt most commonly used
in the U.S.
Main Line . . . Vein, a vein injection.
Making Cars . . . Breaking into parked cars and stealing
the contents.
Mark . . . Someone easy to rob, like a drunk with a roll of
money.
Meet . . . An appointment, usually between peddler and
customer.
Nembies, Goof Balls, Yellow Jackets . . . Nembutal capsules.
Nembutal is a barbiturate used by junkies "to
take the edge off" when they can't get junk.
P.G. . . . Paregoric. A weak, camphorated tincture of
opium, two grains to the ounce. Two ounces will fix a
sick addict. It can be bought without prescription in
some states. P.G. can be injected intravenously after
burning out the alcohol and straining out the camphor.
The People . . . Narcotics agents. Another New Orleans
expression.
Pickup . . . To use. Generally refers to weed. But you
can "pickup" on nembies, lush, or junk.
Piece . . . Gun.
Pigeon, Fink, Rat . . . Informer.
Plant, Stash . . . To hide something, usually junk, or an
"outfit."
Poke . . . Wallet.
Pop, Bang, Shot, Fix . . . Injection of junk.
Pop Corn . . . Someone with a legitimate job, as opposed
to a "hustler" or thief.
Pusher, Peddler, "The Man" . . . Junk seller. "The Man"
is a New Orleans expression, and can also refer to a
Narcotics Agent.
Put Down a Hype or Routine . . . To give someone a
story, to persuade, or con someone.
Put Your Hand Out . . . To go through a lush's pockets.
Score . . . To buy weed or marijuana.
Serve, Take Care Of . . . To sell junk to a user.
Shake, Rumble . . . Search by the law.
Skin . . . Skin injection.
Sick, Gaping, Yenning . . . Sickness caused by lack of
junk.
Smash . . . Change, money, coins.
Square . . . The opposite of hip. Someone who does not
understand the jive.
Spade . . . A Negro.
Speed Ball . . . Cocaine mixed with morphine or heroin.
Spike . . . Needle.
Stuff, Junk . . . General terms for opium and all derivatives
of opium: morphine, heroin, Dilaudid, pantopon,
codeine, dionine.
Take a Fall . . . To get arrested.
Tea head, Head, Viper . . . User of marijuana.
Tie-up . . . Tie, or handkerchief, used as a tourniquet for
a vein shot.
User, Hype, Junky, Junker, Shmecker . . . Junk addict.
Weed, Tea, Gage, Grass, Greefa, Muggles, Pot, Hash
. . . Marijuana, hashish.
White stuff . . . Morphine, or heroin, as opposed to "brown
stuff."
Working the Hole . . . Lush-working.
Works, Outfit, Joint . . . A user's outfit for injecting junk.
Consists of an eyedropper, hypodermic needle, strip
of paper to fit the dropper tight into the needle, and a
spoon or other container in which to dissolve the junk.
Write . . . To write a narcotic prescription. To "make a
Croaker for a Script" means to persuade a doctor to
write a prescription for junk.
Wrong . . . Term used to describe an informer.
Yen Pox . . . Ash of opium after the opium has been
smoked. Yen Pox contains about the same morphine
content as opium before smoking. It can be eaten with
hot coffee, or dissolved in water and injected intravenously.
It should be understood that the meanings of these
words are subject to rapid changes, and that a word that
has one hip meaning one year may have another the
next. The hip sensibility mutates. For example, "Fey"
means not only white, but fated or demoniac. Not only do
the words change meanings but meanings vary locally
at the same time. A final glossary, therefore, cannot be
made of words whose intentions are fugitive.
When I lived in Mexico City at the end of the 1940's, it was a city of one million people, with clear
sparkling air and the sky that special shade of blue that goes so well with circling vultures, blood
and sandthe raw menacing pitiless Mexican blue. I liked Mexico City from the first day of my
first visit there. In 1949, it was a cheap place to live, with a large foreign colony, fabulous
whorehouses and restaurants, cockfights and bullfights, and every conceivable diversion. A
single man could live well there for two dollars a day. My New Orleans case for heroin and
marijuana possession looked so unpromising that I decided not to show up for the court date, and
I rented an apartment in a quiet, middle-class neighborhood of Mexico City.
I knew that under the statute of limitations I could not return to the United States for five years, so
I applied for Mexican citizenship and enrolled in some courses in Mayan and Mexican
archaeology at Mexico City College. The G.I. Bill paid for my books and tuition, and a seventyfive-
dollar-per-month living allowance. I thought I might go into farming, or perhaps open a bar on
the American border.
The City appealed to me. The slum areas compared favorably with anything in Asia for sheer filth
and poverty. People would shit all over the street, then lie down and sleep in it with the flies
crawling in and out of their mouths. Entrepreneurs, not infrequently lepers, built fires on street
corners and cooked up hideous, stinking, nameless messes of food, which they dispensed to
passersby. Drunks slept right on the sidewalks of the main drag, and no cops bothered them. It
seemed to me that everyone in Mexico had mastered the art of minding his own business. If a
man wanted to wear a monocle or carry a cane, he did not hesitate to do it, and no one gave him
a second glance. Boys and young men walked down the street arm in arm and no one paid them
any mind. It wasn't that people didn't care what others thought; it simply would not occur to a
Mexican to expect criticism from a stranger, nor to criticize the behavior of others.
Mexico was basically an Oriental culture that reflected two thousand years of disease and poverty
and degradation and stupidity and slavery and brutality and psychic and physical terrorism. It was
sinister and gloomy and chaotic, with the special chaos of a dream. No Mexican really knew any
other Mexican, and when a Mexican killed someone (which happened often), it was usually his
best friend. Anyone who felt like it carried a gun, and I read of several occasions where drunken
cops, shooting at the habitus of a bar, were themselves shot by armed civilians. As authority
figures, Mexican cops ranked with streetcar conductors.
All officials were corruptible, income tax was very low, and medical treatment was extremely
reasonable, because the doctors advertised and cut their prices. You could get a clap cured for
$2.40, or buy the penicillin and shoot it yourself. There were no regulations curtailing selfmedication,
and needles and syringes could be bought anywhere. This was in the time of
Alemn, when the mordida was king, and a pyramid of bribes reached from the cop on the beat
up to the Presidente. Mexico City was also the murder capital of the world, with the highest percapita
homicide rate. I remember newspaper stories every day, like these:
A campesino is in from the country, waiting for a bus: linen pants, sandals made from a tire, a
wide sombrero, a machete at his belt. Another man is also waiting, dressed in a suit, looking at
his wrist watch, muttering angrily. The campesino whips out his machete and cuts the man's head
clean off. He later told police: "He was giving me looks muy feo and finally I could not contain
myself." Obviously the man was annoyed because the bus was late, and was looking down the
road for the bus, when the campesino misinterpreted his action, and the next thing a head rolls in
the gutter, grimacing horribly and showing gold teeth.
Two campesinos are sitting disconsolate by the roadside. They have no money for breakfast. But
look: a boy leading several goats. One campesino picks up a rock and bashes the boy's brains
out. They take the goats to the nearest village and sell them. They are eating breakfast when they
are apprehended by the police.
A man lives in a little house. A stranger asks him how to find the road for Ayahuasca. "Ah, this
way, seor." He is leading the man around and around: "The road is right here." Suddenly he
realizes he hasn't any idea where the road is, and why should he be bothered? So he picks up a
rock and kills his tormentor.
Campesinos took their toll with rock and machete. More murderous were the politicians and offduty
cops, each with his .45 automatic. One learned to hit the deck. Here is another actual story:
A gun-toting poltico hears his girl is cheating, meeting someone in this cocktail lounge. Some
American kid just happens in and sits next to her, when the macho bursts in: "CHINGOA!" Hauls
out his .45 and blasts the kid right off his bar stool. They drag the body outside and down the
street a ways. When the cops arrive, the bartender shrugs and mops his bloody bar, and says
only: "Malos, esos muchachos!" ("Those bad boys!")
Every country has its own special Shits, like the Southern law-man counting his Nigger notches,
and the sneering Mexican macho is certainly up there when it comes to sheer ugliness. And
many of the Mexican middle class are about as awful as any bourgeoisie in the world. I remember
that in Mexico the narcotic scripts were bright yellow, like a thousand-dollar bill, or a dishonorable
discharge from the Army. One time Old Dave and I tried to fill such a script, which he had
obtained quite legitimately from the Mexican government. The first pharmacist we hit jerked back
snarling from such a sight: "No prestamos servicio a los viciosos!" ("We do not serve dope
fiends!")
From one farmaca to another we walked, getting sicker with every step: "No, seor. . . ." We
must have walked for miles.
"Never been in this neighborhood before."
"Well, let's try one more."
Finally we entered a tiny hole-in-the-wall farmaca. I pulled out the receta, and a gray-haired lady
smiled at me. The pharmacist looked at the script, and said, "Two minutes, seor."
We sat down to wait. There were geraniums in the window. A small boy brought me a glass of
water, and a cat rubbed against my leg. After awhile the pharmacist returned with our morphine.
"Gracias, seor"
Outside, the neighborhood now seemed enchanted: Little farmacas in a market, crates and stalls
outside, a pulquera on the corner. Kiosks selling fried grasshoppers and peppermint candy black
with flies. Boys in from the country in spotless white linen and rope sandals, with faces of
burnished copper and fierce innocent black eyes, like exotic animals, of a dazzling sexless
beauty. Here is a boy with sharp features and black skin, smelling of vanilla, a gardenia behind
his ear. Yes, you found a Johnson, but you waded through Shitville to find him. You always do.
Just when you think the earth is exclusively populated by Shits, you meet a Johnson.
One day there was a knock on my door at eight in the morning. I went to the door in my pyjamas,
and there was an inspector from Immigration.
"Get your clothes on. You're under arrest." It seemed the woman next door had turned in a long
report on my drunk and disorderly behavior, and also there was something wrong with my papers
and where was the Mexican wife I was supposed to have? The Immigration officers were all set
to throw me in jail to await deportation as an undesirable alien. Of course, everything could be
straightened out with some money, but my interviewer was the head of the deporting department
and he wouldn't go for peanuts. I finally had to get up off of two hundred dollars. As I walked
home from the Immigration Office, I imagined what I might have had to pay if I had really had an
investment in Mexico City.
I thought of the constant problems the three American owners of the Ship Ahoy encountered. The
cops came in all the time for a mordida, and then came the sanitary inspectors, then more cops
trying to get something on the joint so they could take a real bite. They took the waiter downtown
and beat the shit out of him. They wanted to know where was Kelly's body stashed? How many
women been raped in the joint? Who brought in the weed? And so on. Kelly was an American
hipster who had been shot in the Ship Ahoy six months before, had recovered, and was now in
the U.S. Army. No woman was ever raped there, and no one ever smoked weed there. By now
I had entirely abandoned my plans to open a bar in Mexico.
An addict has little regard for his image. He wears the dirtiest, shabbiest clothes, and feels no
need to call attention to himself. During my period of addiction in Tangiers, I was known as "El
Hombre Invisible," The Invisible Man. This disintegration of self-image often results in an
indiscriminate image hunger. Billie Holliday said she knew she was off junk when she stopped
watching TV. In my first novel, Junky, the protagonist "Lee" comes across as integrated and selfcontained,
sure of himself and where he is going. In Queer he is disintegrated, desperately in
need of contact, completely unsure of himself and of his purpose.
The difference of course is simple: Lee on junk is covered, protected and also severely limited.
Not only does junk short-circuit the sex drive, it also blunts emotional reactions to the vanishing
point, depending on the dosage. Looking back over the action of Queer, that hallucinated month
of acute withdrawal takes on a hellish glow of menace and evil drifting out of neon-lit cocktail
bars, the ugly violence, the .45 always just under the surface. On junk I was insulated, didn't
drink, didn't go out much, just shot up and waited for the next shot.
When the cover is removed, everything that has been held in check by junk spills out. The
withdrawing addict is subject to the emotional excesses of a child or an adolescent, regardless of
his actual age. And the sex drive returns in full force. Men of sixty experience wet dreams and
spontaneous orgasms (an extremely unpleasant experience, agaant as the French say, putting
the teeth on edge). Unless the reader keeps this in mind, the metamorphosis of Lee's character
will appear as inexplicable or psychotic. Also bear in mind that the withdrawal syndrome is selflimiting,
lasting no more than a month. And Lee has a phase of excessive drinking, which
exacerbates all the worst and most dangerous aspects of the withdrawal sickness: reckless,
unseemly, outrageous, maudlinin a word, appallingbehavior.
After withdrawal, the organism readjusts and stabilizes at a pre-junk level. In the narrative, this
stabilization is finally reached during the South American trip. No junk is available, nor any other
drug, after the paregoric of Panama. Lee's drinking has dwindled to several good stiff ones at
sundown. Not so different from the Lee of the later Yage Letters, except for the phantom
presence of Allerton.
So I had written Junky, and the motivation for that was comparatively simple: to put down in the
most accurate and simple terms my experiences as an addict. I was hoping for publication,
money, recognition. Kerouac had published The Town and the City at the time I started writing
Junky. I remember writing in a letter to him, when his book was published, that money and fame
were now assured. As you can see, I knew nothing about the writing business at the time.
My motivations to write Queer were more complex, and are not clear to me at the present time.
Why should I wish to chronicle so carefully these extremely painful and unpleasant and lacerating
memories? While it was I who wrote Junky, I feel that I was being written in Queer. I was also
taking pains to ensure further writing, so as to set the record straight: writing as inoculation. As
soon as something is written, it loses the power of surprise, just as a virus loses its advantage
when a weakened virus has created alerted antibodies. So I achieved some immunity from further
perilous ventures along these lines by writing my experience down.
At the beginning of the Queer manuscript fragment, having returned from the insulation of junk to
the land of the living like a frantic inept Lazarus, Lee seems determined to score, in the sexual
sense of the word. There is something curiously systematic and unsexual about his quest for a
suitable sex object, crossing one prospect after another off a list which seems compiled with
ultimate failure in mind. On some very deep level he does not want to succeed, but will go to any
length to avoid the realization that he is not really looking for sex contact.
But Allerton was definitely some sort of contact. And what was the contact that Lee was looking
for? Seen from here, a very confused concept that had nothing to do with Allerton as a character.
While the addict is indifferent to the impression he creates in others, during withdrawal he may
feel the compulsive need for an audience, and this is clearly what Lee seeks in Allerton: an
audience, the acknowledgement of his performance, which of course is a mask, to cover a
shocking disintegration. So he invents a frantic attention-getting format which he calls the
Routine: shocking, funny, riveting. "It is an Ancient Mariner, and he stoppeth one of three. . . ."
The performance takes the form of routines: fantasies about Chess Players, the Texas Oilman,
Corn Hole Gus's Used-Slave Lot. In Queer, Lee addresses these routines to an actual audience.
Later, as he develops as a writer, the audience becomes internalized. But the same mechanism
that produced A.J. and Doctor Benway, the same creative impulse, is dedicated to Allerton, who
is forced into the role of approving Muse, in which he feels understandably uncomfortable.
What Lee is looking for is contact or recognition, like a photon emerging from the haze of
insubstantiality to leave an indelible recording in Allerton's consciousness. Failing to find an
adequate observer, he is threatened by painful dispersal, like an unobserved photon. Lee does
not know that he is already committed to writing, since this is the only way he has of making an
indelible record, whether Allerton is inclined to observe or not. Lee is being inexorably pressed
into the world of fiction. He has already made the choice between his life and his work.
The manuscript trails off in Puyo, End of the Road town. . . . The search for Yage has failed. The
mysterious Doctor Cotter wants only to be rid of his unwelcome guests. He suspects them to be
agents of his treacherous partner Gill, intent on stealing his genius work of isolating curare from
the composite arrow poison. I heard later that the chemical companies decided simply to buy up
the arrow poison in quantity and extract the curare in their American laboratories. The drug was
soon synthesized, and is now a standard substance found in many muscle-relaxing preparations.
So it would seem that Cotter really had nothing to lose: his efforts were already superseded.
Dead end. And Puyo can serve as a model for the Place of Dead Roads: a dead, meaningless
conglomerate of tin-roofed houses under a continual downpour of rain. Shell has pulled out,
leaving prefabricated bungalows and rusting machinery behind. And Lee has reached the end of
his line, an end implicit in the beginning. He is left with the impact of unbridgeable distances, the
defeat and weariness of a long, painful journey made for nothing, wrong turnings, the track lost, a
bus waiting in the rain . . . back to Ambato, Quito, Panama, Mexico City.
When I started to write this companion text to Queer, I was paralyzed with a heavy reluctance, a
writer's block like a straitjacket: "I glance at the manuscript of Queer and feel I simply can't read it.
My past was a poisoned river from which one was fortunate to escape, and by which one feels
immediately threatened, years after the events recorded. Painful to an extent I find it difficult to
read, let alone to write about. Every word and gesture sets the teeth on edge." The reason for this
reluctance becomes clearer as I force myself to look: the book is motivated and formed by an
event which is never mentioned, in fact is carefully avoided: the accidental shooting death of my
wife, Joan, in September 1951.
While I was writing The Place of Dead Roads, I felt in spiritual contact with the late English writer
Denton Welch, and modelled the novel's hero, Kim Carson, directly on him. Whole sections came
to me as if dictated, like table-tapping. I have written about the fateful morning of Denton's
accident, which left him an invalid for the remainder of his short life. If he had stayed a little longer
here, not so long there, he would have missed his appointment with the female motorist who hit
his bicycle from behind for no apparent reason. At one point Denton had stopped to have coffee,
and looking at the brass hinges on the caf's window shutters, some of them broken, he was hit
by a feeling of universal desolation and loss. So every event of that morning is charged with
special significance, as if it were underlined. This portentous second sight permeates Welch's
writing: a scone, a cup of tea, an inkwell purchased for a few shillings, become charged with a
special and often sinister significance.
I get exactly the same feeling to an almost unbearable degree as I read the manuscript of Queer.
The event towards which Lee feels himself inexorably driven is the death of his wife by his own
hand, the knowledge of possession, a dead hand waiting to slip over his like a glove. So a smog
of menace and evil rises from the pages, an evil that Lee, knowing and yet not knowing, tries to
escape with frantic flights of fantasy: his routines, which set one's teeth on edge because of the
ugly menace just behind or to one side of them, a presence palpable as a haze.
Brion Gysin said to me in Paris: "For ugly spirit shot Joan because . . ." A bit of mediumistic
message that was not completedor was it? It doesn't need to be completed, if you read it: "ugly
spirit shot Joan to be cause," that is, to maintain a hateful parasitic occupation. My concept of
possession is closer to the medieval model than to modern psychological explanations, with their
dogmatic insistence that such manifestations must come from within and never, never, never
from without. (As if there were some clear-cut difference between inner and outer.) I mean a
definite possessing entity. And indeed, the psychological concept might well have been devised
by the possessing entities, since nothing is more dangerous to a possessor than being seen as a
separate invading creature by the host it has invaded. And for this reason the possessor shows
itself only when absolutely necessary.
In 1939, I became interested in Egyptian hieroglyphics and went out to see someone in the
Department of Egyptology at the University of Chicago. And something was screaming in my ear:
"YOU DONT BELONG HERE!" Yes, the hieroglyphics provided one key to the mechanism of
possession. Like a virus, the possessing entity must find a port of entry.
This occasion was my first clear indication of something in my being that was not me, and not
under my control. I remember a dream from this period: I worked as an exterminator in Chicago,
in the late 1930's, and lived in a rooming house on the near North Side. In the dream I am floating
up near the ceiling with a feeling of utter death and despair, and looking down I see my body
walking out the door with deadly purpose.
One wonders if Yage could have saved the day by a blinding revelation. I remember a cut-up I
made in Paris years later: "Raw peeled winds of hate and mischance blew the shot." And for
years I thought this referred to blowing a shot of junk, when the junk squirts out the side of the
syringe or dropper owing to an obstruction. Brion Gysin pointed out the actual meaning: the shot
that killed Joan.
I had bought a Scout knife in Quito. It had a metal handle and a curious tarnished old look, like
something from a turn-of-the-century junk shop. I can see it in a tray of old knives and rings, with
the silver plate flaking off. It was about three o'clock in the afternoon, a few days after I came
back to Mexico City, and I decided to have the knife sharpened. The knife-sharpener had a little
whistle and a fixed route, and as I walked down the street towards his cart a feeling of loss and
sadness that had weighed on me all day so I could hardly breathe intensified to such an extent
that I found tears streaming down my face.
"What on earth is wrong?" I wondered.
This heavy depression and a feeling of doom occurs again and again in the text. Lee usually
attributes it to his failures with Allerton: "A heavy drag slowed movement and thought. Lee's face
was rigid, his voice toneless." Allerton has just refused a dinner invitation and left abruptly: "Lee
stared at the table, his thoughts slow, as if he were very cold." (Reading this / am cold and
depressed.)
Here is a precognitive dream from Cotter's shack in Ecuador: "He was standing in front of the
Ship Ahoy. The place looked deserted. He could hear someone crying. He saw his little son, and
knelt down and took the child in his arms. The sound of crying came closer, a wave of sadness.
... He held little Willy close against his chest. A group of people were standing there in Convict
suits. Lee wondered what they were doing there and why he was crying."
I have constrained myself to remember the day of Joan's death, the overwhelming feeling of
doom and loss . . . walking down the street I suddenly found tears streaming down my face.
"What is wrong with me?" The small Scout knife with a metal handle, the plating peeling off, a
smell of old coins, the knife-sharpener's whistle. Whatever happened to this knife I never
reclaimed?
I am forced to the appalling conclusion that I would never have become a writer but for Joan's
death, and to a realization of the extent to which this event has motivated and formulated my
writing. I live with the constant threat of possession, and a constant need to escape from
possession, from Control. So the death of Joan brought me in contact with the invader, the Ugly
Spirit, and maneuvered me into a lifelong struggle, in which I have had no choice except to write
my way out.
I have constrained myself to escape death. Denton Welch is almost my face. Smell of old coins.
Whatever happened to this knife called Allerton, back to the appalling Margaras Inc. The
realization is basic formulated doing? The day of Joan's doom and loss. Found tears streaming
down from Allerton peeling off the same person as a Western shootist. What are you rewriting?
A lifelong preoccupation with Control and Virus. Having gained access the virus uses the host's
energy, blood, flesh and bones to make copies of itself. Model of dogmatic insistence never never
from without was screaming in my ear, "YOU DON'T BELONG HERE!"
A straitjacket notation carefully paralyzed with heavy reluctance. To escape their prewritten lines
years after the events recorded. A writers block avoided Joans death. Denton Welch is Kim
Carson's voice through a cloud underlined broken table tapping.
Lee turned his attention to a Jewish boy named Carl Steinberg, whom he had known casually for
about a year. The first time he saw Carl, Lee thought, "I could use that, if the family jewels weren't
in pawn to Uncle Junk."
The boy was blond, his face thin and sharp with a few freckles, always a little pink around the
ears and nose as though he had just washed. Lee had never known anyone to look as clean as
Carl. With his small round brown eyes and fuzzy blond hair, he reminded Lee of a young bird.
Born in Munich, Carl had grown up in Baltimore. In manner and outlook he seemed European. He
shook hands with traces of a heel-click. In general, Lee found European youths easier to talk to
than Americans. The rudeness of many Americans depressed him, a rudeness based on a solid
ignorance of the whole concept of manners, and on the proposition that for social purposes, all
people are more or less equal and interchangeable.
What Lee looked for in any relationship was the feel of contact. He felt some contact with Carl.
The boy listened politely and seemed to understand what Lee was saying. After some initial
balking, he accepted the fact of Lee's sexual interest in his person. He told Lee, "Since I can't
change my mind about you, I will have to change my mind about other things."
But Lee soon found out he could make no progress. "If I got this far with an American kid," he
reasoned, "I could get the rest of the way. So he's not queer. People can be obliging. What is the
obstacle?" Lee finally guessed the answer: "What makes it impossible is that his mother wouldn't
like it." And Lee knew it was time to pack in. He recalled a homosexual Jewish friend who lived in
Oklahoma City. Lee had asked, "Why do you live here? You have enough money to live
anywhere you like." The reply was, "It would kill my mother if I moved away." Lee had been
speechless.
One afternoon Lee was walking with Carl by the Amsterdam Avenue park. Suddenly Carl bowed
slightly and shook Lee's hand. "Best of luck," he said, and ran for a streetcar.
Lee stood looking after him, then walked over into the park and sat down on a concrete bench
that was molded to resemble wood. Blue flowers from a blossoming tree had fallen on the bench
and on the walk in front of it. Lee sat there watching the flowers move along the path in a warm
spring wind. The sky was clouding up for an afternoon shower. Lee felt lonely and defeated. "I'll
have to look for someone else," he thought. He covered his face with his hands. He was very
tired.
He saw a shadowy line of boys. As each boy came to the front of the line, he said "Best of luck,"
and ran for a streetcar.
"Sorry . . . wrong number ... try again . . . somewhere else . . . someplace else . . . not here. . . not
me ... can't use it, don't need it, don't want it. Why pick on me?" The last face was so real and so
ugly, Lee said aloud, "Who asked you, you ugly son of a bitch?"
Lee opened his eyes and looked around. Two Mexican adolescents walked by, their arms around
each other's necks. He looked after them, licking his dry, cracked lips.
Lee continued to see Carl after that, until finally Carl said "Best of luck" for the last time, and
walked away. Lee heard later he had gone with his family to Uruguay.
Lee was sitting with Winston Moor in the Rathskeller, drinking double tequilas. Cuckoo clocks and
moth-eaten deer heads gave the restaurant a dreary, out-of-place, Tyrolean look. A smell of spilt
beer, overflowing toilets and sour garbage hung in the place like a thick fog and drifted out into
the street through narrow, inconvenient swinging doors. A television set which was out of order
half the time and which emitted horrible, guttural squawks was the final touch of unpleasantness.
"I was in here last night," Lee said to Moor. "Got talking to a queer doctor and his boyfriend. The
doctor was a major in the Medical Corps. The boyfriend is some kind of vague engineer. Awfullooking
little bitch. So the doctor invites me to have a drink with them, and the boyfriend is getting
jealous, and I don't want a beer anyway, which the doctor takes as a reflection on Mexico and on
his own person. He begins the do-you-like-Mexico routine. So I tell him Mexico is okay, some of
it, but he personally is a pain in the ass. Told him this in a nice way, you understand. Besides, I
had to go home to my wife in any case.
"So he says, 'You don't have any wife, you are just as queer as I am.' I told him, 'I don't know how
queer you are, Doc, and I ain't about to find out. It isn't as if you was a good-looking Mexican.
You're a goddamned old ugly-looking Mexican. And that goes double for your moth-eaten
boyfriend.' I was hoping, of course, the deal wouldn't come to any extreme climax. . . .
"You never knew Hatfield? Of course not. Before your time. He killed a cargador in a pulquera.
The deal cost him five hundred dollars. Now, figuring a cargador as rock bottom, think how much
it would cost you to shoot a major in the Mexican Army."
Moor called the waiter over. "Yo quiero un sandwich," he said, smiling at the waiter. "Quel
sandwiches tiene?"
"What do you want?" Lee asked, annoyed at the interruption.
"I don't know exactly," said Moor, looking through the menu. "I wonder if they could make a
melted cheese sandwich on toasted whole-wheat bread?" Moor turned back to the waiter, with a
smile that was intended to be boyish.
Lee closed his eyes as Moor launched an attempt to convey the concept of melted cheese on
wholewheat toast. Moor was being charmingly helpless with his inadequate Spanish. He was
putting down a little-boy-in-a-foreign-country routine. Moor smiled into an inner mirror, a smile
without a trace of warmth, but it was not a cold smile: it was the meaningless smile of senile
decay, the smile that goes with false teeth, the smile of a man grown old and stir-simple in the
solitary confinement of exclusive self-love.
Moor was a thin young man with blond hair that was habitually somewhat long. He had pale blue
eyes and very white skin. There were dark patches under his eyes and two deep lines around the
mouth. He looked like a child, and at the same time like a prematurely aged man. His face
showed the ravages of the death process, the inroads of decay in flesh cut off from the living
charge of contact. Moor was motivated, literally kept alive and moving, by hate, but there was no
passion or violence in his hate. Moor's hate was a slow, steady push, weak but infinitely
persistent, waiting to take advantage of any weakness in another. The slow drip of Moor's hate
had etched the lines of decay in his face. He had aged without experience of life, like a piece of
meat rotting on a pantry shelf.
Moor made a practice of interrupting a story just before the point was reached. Often he would
start a long conversation with a waiter or anybody else handy, or he would go vague and distant,
yawn, and say, "What was that?" as though recalled to dull reality from reflections of which others
could have no concept.
Moor began talking about his wife. "At first, Bill, she was so dependent on me that she used
literally to have hysterics when I had to go to the museum where I work. I managed to build up
her ego to the point where she didn't need me, and after that the only thing I could do was leave.
There was nothing more I could do for her."
Moor was putting down his sincere act. "My God," Lee thought, "he really believes it."
Lee ordered another double tequila. Moor stood up. "Well, I have to get going," he said. "I have a
lot of things to do."
"Well, listen," said Lee. "How about dinner tonight?"
Moor said, "Well, all right."
"At six in the K.C. Steak House."
"All right. "Moor left.
Lee drank half the tequila the waiter put in front of him. He had known Moor off and on in N.Y. for
several years and never liked him. Moor disliked Lee, but then Moor didn't like anybody. Lee told
himself, "You must be crazy, making passes in that direction, when you know what a bitch he is.
These borderline characters can out-bitch any fag."
When Lee arrived at the K.C. Steak House, Moor was already there. With him he had Tom
Williams, another Salt Lake City boy. Lee thought, "He brought along a chaperone."
"... I like the guy, Tom, but I can't stand to be alone with him. He keeps trying to go to bed with
me. That's what I don't like about queers. You can't keep it on a basis of friendship. ..." Yes, Lee
could hear that conversation.
During dinner Moor and Williams talked about a boat they planned to build at Ziuhuatenejo. Lee
thought this was a silly project. "Boat building is a job for a professional, isn't it?" Lee asked. Moor
pretended not to hear.
After dinner Lee walked back to Moor's rooming house with Moor and Williams. At the door Lee
asked, "Would you gentlemen care for a drink? I'll get a bottle. . . ."He looked from one to the
other.
Moor said, "Well, no. You see we want to work on the plans for this boat we are going to build."
"Oh," said Lee. "Well, I'll see you tomorrow. How about meeting me for a drink in the Rathskeller?
Say around five."
"Well, I expect I'll be busy tomorrow."
"Yes, but you have to eat and drink."
"Well, you see, this boat is more important to me than anything right now. It will take up all my
time."
Lee said, "Suit yourself," and walked away.
Lee was deeply hurt. He could hear Moor saying, "Thanks for running interference, Tom. Well, I
hope he got the idea. Of course Lee is an interesting guy and all that . . . but this queer situation
is just more than I can take." Tolerant, looking at both sides of the question, sympathetic up to a
point, finally forced to draw a tactful but firm line. "And he really believes that," Lee thought. "Like
that crap about building up his wife's ego. He can revel in the satisfactions of virulent bitchiness
and simultaneously see himself as a saint. Quite a trick."
Actually Moor's brush-off was calculated to inflict the maximum hurt possible under the
circumstances. It put Lee in the position of a detestably insistent queer, too stupid and too
insensitive to realize that his attentions were not wanted, forcing Moor to tbe distasteful necessity
of drawing a diagram.
Lee leaned against a lamppost for several minutes. The shock had sobered him, drained away
his drunken euphoria. He realized how tired he was, and how weak, but he was not ready yet to
go home.
Everything made in this country falls apart," Lee thought. He was examining the blade of his
stainless-steel pocketknife. The chrome plating was peeling off like silver paper. "Wouldn't
surprise me if I picked up a boy in the Alameda and his. . . . Here comes honest Joe."
Joe Guidry sat down at the table with Lee, dropping bundles on the table and in the empty chair.
He wiped off the top of a beer bottle with his sleeve and drank half the beer in a long gulp. He
was a large man with a politician's red Irish face.
"What you know?" Lee asked.
"Not much, Lee. Except someone stole my typewriter. And I know who took it. It was that
Brazilian, or whatever he is. You know him. Maurice."
"Maurice? Is that the one you had last week? The wrestler?"
"You mean Louie, the gym instructor. No, this is another one. Louie has decided all that sort of
thing is very wrong and he tells me that I am going to burn in hell, but he is going to heaven."
"Serious?"
"Oh, yes. Well, Maurice is as queer as I am." Joe belched. "Excuse me. If not queerer. But he
won't accept it. I think stealing my typewriter is a way he takes to demonstrate to me and to
himself that he is just in it for all he can get. As a matter of fact, he's so queer I've lost interest in
him. Not completely though. When I see the little bastard I'll most likely invite him back to my
apartment, instead of beating the shit out of him like I should."
Lee tipped his chair back against the wall and looked around the room. Someone was writing a
letter at the next table. If he had overheard the conversation, he gave no sign. The proprietor was
reading the bullfight section of the paper, spread out on the counter in front of him. A silence
peculiar to Mexico seeped into the room, a vibrating, soundless hum.
Joe finished his beer, wiped his mouth with the hack of his hand, and stared at the wall with
watery, bloodshot blue eyes. The silence seeped into Lee's body, and his face went slack and
blank. The effect was curiously spectral, as though you could see through his face. The face was
ravaged and vicious and old, but the clear, green eyes were dreamy and innocent. His lightbrown
hair was extremely fine and would not stay combed. Generally it fell down across his
forehead, and on occasion brushed the food he was eating or got in his drink.
"Well, I have to be going," said Joe. He gathered up his bundles and nodded to Lee, bestowing
on him one of his sweet politician smiles, and walked out, his fuzzy, half-bald head outlined for a
moment in the sunlight before he disappeared from view.
Lee yawned and picked up a comic section from the next table. It was two days old. He put it
down and yawned again. He got up and paid for his drink and walked out into the late afternoon
sun. He had no place to go, so he went over to Sears' magazine counter and read the new
magazines for free.
He cut back past the K.C. Steak House. Moor beckoned to him from inside the restaurant. Lee
went in and sat down at his table. "You look terrible," he said. He knew that was what Moor
wanted to hear. As a matter of fact, Moor did look worse than usual. He had always been pale;
now he was yellowish.
The boat project had fallen through. Moor and
Williams and Williams' wife, Lil, were back from Ziuhuatenejo. Moor was not on speaking terms
with the Williamses.
Lee ordered a pot of tea. Moor started talking about Lil. "You know, Lil ate the cheese down
there. She ate everything and she never got sick. She won't go to a doctor. One morning she
woke up blind in one eye and she could barely see out the other. But she wouldn't have a doctor.
In a few days she could see again, good as ever. I was hoping she'd go blind."
Lee realized Moor was perfectly serious. "He's insane," Lee thought.
Moor went on about Lil. She had made advances to him, of course. He had paid more than his
share of the rent and food. She was a terrible cook. They had left him there sick. He shifted to the
subject of his health. "Just let me show you my urine test," Moor said with boyish enthusiasm. He
spread the piece of paper out on the table. Lee looked at it without interest.
"Look here." Moor pointed. "Urea thirteen. Normal is fifteen to twenty-two. Is that serious, do you
think?"
"I'm sure I don't know."
"And traces of sugar. What does the whole picture mean?" Moor obviously considered the
question of intense interest.
"Why don't you take it to a doctor?" "I did. He said he would have to take a twenty-four-hour test,
that is, samples of urine over a twenty-four-hour period, before he could express any opinion. . . .
You know, I have a dull pain in the chest, right here. I wonder if it could be tuberculosis?"
"Take an x-ray."
"I did. The doctor is going to take a skin reaction test. Oh, another thing, I think I have undulant
fever. ... Do you think I have fever now?" He pushed his forehead forward for Lee to feel. Lee felt
an ear lobe. "I don't think so," he said.
Moor went on and on, following the circular route of the true hypochondriac, back to tuberculosis
and the urine test. Lee thought he had never heard anything as tiresome and depressing. Moor
did not have tuberculosis or kidney trouble or undulant fever. He was sick with the sickness of
death. Death was in every cell of his body. He gave off a faint, greenish steam of decay. Lee
imagined he would glow in the dark.
Moor talked with boyish eagerness. "I think I need an operation."
Lee said he really had to go.
Lee turned down Coahuila, walking with one foot falling directly in front of the other, always fast
and purposeful, as if he were leaving the scene of a holdup. He passed a group in expatriate
uniform: red-checked shirt outside the belt, blue jeans and beard, and another group of young
men in conventional, if shabby, clothes. Among these Lee recognized a boy named Eugene
Allerton. Allerton was tall and very thin, with high cheekbones, a small, bright-red mouth, and
amber-colored eyes that took on a faint violet flush when he was drunk. His gold-brown hair was
differentially bleached by the sun like a sloppy dyeing job. He had straight, black eyebrows and
black eyelashes. An equivocal face, very young, clean-cut and boyish, at the same time
conveying an impression of makeup, delicate and exotic and Oriental. Allerton was never
completely neat or clean, but you did not think of him as being dirty. He was simply careless and
lazy to the point of appearing, at times, only half awake. Often he did not hear what someone said
a foot from his ear. "Pellagra, I expect," thought Lee sourly. He nodded to Allerton and smiled.
Allerton nodded, as if surprised, and did not smile.
Lee walked on, a little depressed. "Perhaps I can accomplish something in that direction. Well, a
ver. . . ." He froze in front of a restaurant like a bird dog: "Hungry . . . quicker to eat here than buy
something and cook it." When Lee was hungry, when he wanted a drink or a shot of morphine,
delay was unbearable.
He went in, ordered steak a la Mexicana and a glass of milk, and waited with his mouth watering
for food. A young man with a round face and a loose mouth came into the restaurant. Lee said,
"Hello, Horace," in a clear voice. Horace nodded without speaking and sat down as far from Lee
as he could get in the small restaurant. Lee smiled. His food arrived and he ate quickly, like an
animal, cramming bread and steak into his mouth and washing it down with gulps of milk. He
leaned back in his chair and lit a cigarette.
"Un caf slo," he called to the waitress as she walked by, carrying a pineapple soda to two
young Mexicans in double-breasted pinstripe suits. One of the Mexicans had moist brown popeyes
and a scraggly moustache of greasy black hairs. He looked pointedly at Lee, and Lee
looked away. "Careful," he thought, "or he will be over here asking me how I like Mexico." He
dropped his half-smoked cigarette into half an inch of cold coffee, walked over to the counter,
paid the bill, and was out of the restaurant before the Mexican could formulate an opening
sentence. When Lee decided to leave some place, his departure was abrupt.
The Ship Ahoy had a few phony hurricane lamps by way of a nautical atmosphere. Two small
rooms with tables, the bar in one room, and four high, precarious stools. The place was always
dimly lit and sinister-looking. The patrons were tolerant, but in no way bohemian. The bearded set
never frequented the Ship Ahoy. The place existed on borrowed time, without a liquor license,
under many changes of management. At this time it was run by an American named Tom Weston
and an American-born Mexican.
Lee walked directly to the bar and ordered a drink. He drank it and ordered a second one before
looking around the room to see if Allerton was there. Allerton was alone at a table, tipped back in
a chair with one leg crossed over the other, holding a bottle of beer on his knee. He nodded to
Lee. Lee tried to achieve a greeting at once friendly and casual, designed to show interest without
pushing their short acquaintance. The result was ghastly.
As Lee stood aside to bow in his dignified old-world greeting, there emerged instead a leer of
naked lust, wrenched in the pain and hate of his deprived body and, in simultaneous double
exposure, a sweet child's smile of liking and trust, shockingly out of time and out of place,
mutilated and hopeless.
Allerton was appalled. "Perhaps he has some sort of tic," he thought. He decided to remove
himself from contact with Lee before the man did something even more distasteful. The effect
was like a broken connection. Allerton was not cold or hostile; Lee simply wasn't there so far as
he was concerned. Lee looked at him helplessly for a moment, then turned back to the bar,
defeated and shaken.
Lee finished his second drink. When he looked around again, Allerton was playing chess with
Mary, an American girl with dyed red hair and carefully applied makeup, who had come into the
bar in the meantime. "Why waste time here?" Lee thought. He paid for the two drinks and walked
out.
He took a cab to the Chimu Bar, which was a fag bar frequented by Mexicans, and spent the
night with a young boy he met there.
At that time the G.I. students patronized Lola's during the daytime and the Ship Ahoy at night.
Lola's was not exactly a bar. It was a small beer-and-soda joint. There was a Coca-Cola box full
of beer and soda and ice at the left of the door as you came in. A counter with tube-metal stools
covered in yellow glazed leather ran down one side of the room as far as the juke box. Tables
were lined along the wall opposite the counter. The stools had long since lost the rubber caps for
the legs, and made horrible screeching noises when the maid pushed them around to sweep.
There was a kitchen in back, where a slovenly cook fried everything in rancid fat. There was
neither past nor future in Lola's. The place was a waiting room, where certain people checked in
at certain times.
Several days after his pick-up in the Chimu, Lee was sitting in Lola's, reading aloud from ltimas
Notcias to Jim Cochan. There was a story about a man who murdered his wife and children,
Cochan looked about for a means to escape, but every time he made a move to go, Lee pinned
him down with: "Get a load of this. . . . 'When his wife came home from the market, her husband,
already drunk, was brandishing his .45.' Why do they always have to brandish it?"
Lee read to himself for a moment. Cochan stirred uneasily. "Jesus Christ," said Lee, looking up.
"After he killed his wife and three children he takes a razor and puts on a suicide act." He
returned to the paper: "'But resulted only with scratches that did not require medical attention.'
What a slobbish performance!" He turned the page and began reading the leads half-aloud:
'They're cutting the butter with Vaseline. Fine thing. Lobster with drawn K.Y. . . . Here's a man
was surprised in his taco stand with a dressed-down dog ... a great long skinny hound dog at that.
There's a picture of him posing in front of his taco stand with the dog. . , . One citizen asked
another for a light. The party in second part don't have a match so first part pulls an ice pick and
kills him. Murder is the national neurosis of Mexico."
Cochan stood up. Lee was on his feet instantly. "Sit down on your ass, or what's left of it after four
years in the Navy," he said.
"I got to go."
"What are you, henpecked?"
"No kidding. I been out too much lately. My old lady. . . ."
Lee wasn't listening. He had just seen Allerton stroll by outside the door and look in. Allerton had
not greeted Lee, but walked on after a momentary pause. "I was in the shadow," Lee thought.
"He couldn't see me from the door." Lee did not notice Cochan's departure.
On a sudden impulse he rushed out the door. Allerton was half a block away. Lee overtook him.
Allerton turned, raising his eyebrows, which were straight and black as a pen stroke. He looked
surprised and a bit alarmed, since he was dubious of Lee's sanity. Lee improvised desperately.
"I just wanted to tell you Mary was in Lola's a little while ago. She asked me to tell you she would
be in the Ship Ahoy later on, around five." This was partly true. Mary had been in and had asked
Lee if he had seen Allerton.
Allerton was relieved. "Oh, thank you," he said, quite cordial now. "Will you be around tonight?"
"Yes, I think so." Lee nodded and smiled, and turned away quickly.
Lee left his apartment for the Ship Ahoy just before five. Allerton was sitting at the bar. Lee sat
down and ordered a drink, then turned to Allerton with a casual greeting, as though they were on
familiar and friendly terms. Allerton returned the greeting automatically before he realized that
Lee had somehow established himself on a familiar basis, whereas he had previously decided to
have as little to do with Lee as possible. Allerton had a talent for ignoring people, but he was not
competent at dislodging someone from a position already occupied.
Lee began talkingcasual, unpretentiously intelligent, dryly humorous. Slowly he dispelled
Allerton's impression that he was a peculiar and undesirable character. When Mary arrived, Lee
greeted her with a tipsy old-world gallantry and, excusing himself, left them to a game of chess.
"Who is he?" asked Mary when Lee had gone outside.
"I have no idea," said Allerton. Had he ever met Lee? He could not be sure. Formal introductions
were not expected among the G.I. students. Was Lee a student? Allerton had never seen him at
the school. There was nothing unusual in talking to someone you didn't know, but Lee put
Allerton on guard. The man was somehow familiar to him. When Lee talked, he seemed to mean
more than what he said. A special emphasis to a word or a greeting hinted at a period of
familiarity in some other time and place. As though Lee were saying, "You know what I mean.
You remember."
Allerton shrugged irritably and began arranging the chess pieces on the board. He looked like a
sullen child unable to locate the source of his ill temper. After a few minutes of play his customary
serenity returned, and he began humming.
It was after midnight when Lee returned to the Ship Ahoy. Drunks seethed around the bar, talking
as if everyone else were stone deaf. Allerton stood on the edge of this group, apparently unable
to make himself heard. He greeted Lee warmly, pushed in to the bar, and emerged with two rum
Cokes. "Let's sit down over here," he said.
Allerton was drunk. His eyes were flushed a faint violet tinge, the pupils widely dilated. He was
talking very fast in a high, thin voice, the eerie, disembodied voice of a young child. Lee had
never heard Allerton talk like this before. The effect was like the possession voice of a medium.
The boy had an inhuman gaiety and innocence.
Allerton was telling a story about his experience with the Counter-intelligence Corps in Germany.
An informant had been giving the department bum steers.
"How did you check the accuracy of information?" Lee asked. "How did you know ninety percent
of what your informants told you wasn't fabricated?"
"Actually we didn't, and we got sucked in on a lot of phony deals. Of course, we cross-checked all
information with other informants and we had our own agents in the field. Most of our informants
turned in some phony information, but this one character made all of it up. He had our agents out
looking for a whole fictitious network of Russian spies. So finally the report comes back from
Frankfurtit is all a lot of crap. But instead of clearing out of town before the information could be
checked, he came back with more.
"At this point we'd really had enough of his bullshit. So we locked him up in a cellar. The room
was pretty cold and uncomfortable, but that was all we could do. We had to handle prisoners very
careful.
He kept typing out confessions, enormous things."
This story clearly delighted Allerton, and he kept laughing while he was telling it. Lee was
impressed by his combination of intelligence and childlike charm. Allerton was friendly now,
without reserve or defense, like a child who has never been hurt. He was telling another story.
Lee watched the thin hands, the beautiful violet eyes, the flush of excitement on the boy's face.
An imaginary hand projected with such force it seemed Allerton must feel the touch of
ectoplasmic fingers caressing his ear, phantom thumbs smoothing his eyebrows, pushing the hair
back from his face. Now Lee's hands were running down over the ribs, the stomach. Lee felt the
aching pain of desire in his lungs. His mouth was a little open, showing his teeth in the half-snarl
of a baffled animal. He licked his lips.
Lee did not enjoy frustration. The limitations of his desires were like the bars of a cage, like a
chain and collar, something he had learned as an animal learns, through days and years of
experiencing the snub of the chain, the unyielding bars. He had never resigned himself, and his
eyes looked out through the invisible bars, watchful, alert, waiting for the keeper to forget the
door, for the frayed collar, the loosened bar . . . suffering without despair and without consent.
"I went to the door and there he was with a branch in his mouth," Allerton was saying.
Lee had not been listening. "A branch in his mouth," said Lee, then added inanely, "A big
branch?"
"It was about two feet long. I told him to drop dead, then a few minutes later he appeared at the
window. So I threw a chair at him and he jumped down to the yard from the balcony. About
eighteen feet. He was very nimble. Almost inhuman. It was sort of uncanny, and that's why I
threw the chair. I was scared. We all figured he was putting on an act to get out of the Army."
"What did he look like?" Lee asked.
"Look like? I don't remember especially. He was around eighteen. He looked like a clean-cut boy.
We threw a bucket of cold water on him and left him on a cot downstairs. He began flopping
around but he didn't say anything. We all decided that was an appropriate punishment. I think
they took him to the hospital next day."
"Pneumonia?"
"I don't know. Maybe we shouldn't have thrown water on him."
Lee left Allerton at the door of his building.
"You go in here?" Lee asked.
"Yes, I have a sack here."
Lee said good night and walked home.
After that, Lee met Allerton every day at five in the Ship Ahoy. Allerton was accustomed to
choose his friends from people older than himself, and he looked forward to meeting Lee. Lee
had conversational routines that Allerton had never heard. But he felt at times oppressed by Lee,
as though Lee's presence shut off everything else. He thought he was seeing too much of Lee.
Allerton disliked commitments, and had never been in love or had a close friend. He was now
forced to ask himself: "What does he want from me?" It did not occur to him that Lee was queer,
as he associated queerness with at least some degree of overt effeminacy. He decided finally
that Lee valued him as an audience.
At was a beautiful, clear afternoon in April. Punctually at five, Lee walked into the Ship Ahoy.
Allerton was at the bar with Al Hyman, a periodic alcoholic and one of the nastiest, stupidest,
dullest drunks Lee had ever known. He was, on the other hand, intelligent and simple in manner,
and nice enough when sober. He was sober now.
Lee had a yellow scarf around his neck, and a pair of two-peso sunglasses. He took off the scarf
and dark glasses and dropped them on the bar. "A hard day at the studio," he said, in affected
theatrical accents. He ordered a rum Coke. "You know, it looks like we might bring in an oil well.
They're drilling now over in quadrangle four, and from that rig you could almost spit over into Tex-
Mex where I got my hundred-acre cotton farm."
"I always wanted to be an oilman," Hyman said.
Lee looked him over and shook his head. "I'm afraid not. You see, it isn't everybody can qualify.
You must have the calling. First thing, you must look like an oilman. There are no young oilmen.
An oilman should be about fifty. His skin is cracked and wrinkled like mud that has dried in the
sun, and especially the back of his neck is wrinkled, and the wrinkles are generally full of dust
from looking over blocks and quadrangles. He wears gabardine slacks and a white short-sleeved
sport shirt. His shoes are covered with fine dust, and a faint haze of dust follows him everywhere
like a personal dust storm.
"So you got the calling and the proper appearance. You go around taking up leases. You get five
or six people lined up to lease you their land for drilling. You go to the bank and talk to the
president: 'Now Clem Farris, as fine a man as there is in this Valley and smart too, he's in this
thing up to his balls, and Old Man Scranton and Fred Crockly and Roy Spigot and Ted Bane, all
of them good old boys. Now let me show you a few facts. I could set here and gas all morning,
taking up your time, but I know you're a man accustomed to deal in facts and figures and that's
exactly what I'm here to show you.'
"He goes out to his car, always a coupe or a roadsternever saw an oilman with a sedanand
reaches in hack of the seat and gets out his maps, a huge bundle of maps as big as carpets. He
spreads them out on the bank president's desk, and great clouds of dust spring up from the maps
and fill the bank. "'You see this quadrangle here? That's Tex-Mex. Now there's a fault runs right
along here through Jed Marvin's place. I saw Old Jed too, the other day when I was out there, a
good old boy. There isn't a finer man in this Valley than Jed Marvin. Well now, Socony drilled right
over here.'
"He spreads out more maps. He pulls over another desk and anchors the maps down with
cuspidors. 'Well, they brought in a dry hole, and this map. . . .' He unrolls another one. 'Now if
you'll kindly sit on the other end so it don't roll up on us, I'll show you exactly why it was a dry hole
and why they should never have drilled there in the first place, 'cause you can see just where this
here fault runs smack between Jed's artesian well and the Tex-Mex line over into quadrangle
four. Now that block was surveyed last time in 1922. I guess you know the old boy done the job.
Earl Hoot was his name, a good old boy too. He had his home up in Nacogdoches, but his son-inlaw
owned a place down here, the old Brooks place up north of Tex-Mex, just across the line
from. . . .'
"By this time the president is punchy with boredom, and the dust is getting down in his lungsoilmen
are constitutionally immune to the effects of dustso he says, 'Well, if it's good enough for
those boys I guess it's good enough for me. I'll go along.'
"So the oilman goes back and pulls the same routine on his prospects. Then he gets a geologist
down from Dallas or somewhere, who talks some gibberish about faults and seepage and
intrusions and shale and sand, and selects some place, more or less at random, to start drilling.
"Now the driller. He has to be a real rip-snorting character. They look for him in Boy's Townthe
whore district in border townsand they find him in a room full of empty bottles with three
whores. So they bust a bottle over his head and drag him out and sober him up, and he looks at
the drilling site and spits and says, 'Well, it's your hole.'
"Now if the well turns out dry the oilman says, 'Well, that's the way it goes. Some holes got
lubrication, and some is dry as a whore's cunt on Sunday morning.' There was one oilman, Dry
Hole Dutton they called himall right, Allerton, no cracks about Vaselinebrought in twenty dry
holes before he got cured. That means 'get rich,' in the salty lingo of the oil fraternity."
Joe Guidry came in, and Lee slid off his stool to shake hands. He was hoping Joe would bring up
the subject of queerness so he could gauge Allerton's reaction. He figured it was time to let
Allerton know what the score wassuch a thing as playing it too cool.
They sat down at a table. Somebody had stolen Guidry's radio, his riding boots and wrist watch.
"The trouble with me is," said Guidry, "I like the type that robs me."
"Where you make your mistake is bringing them to your apartment," Lee said, "That's what hotels
are for."
"You're right there. But half the time I don't have money for a hotel. Besides, I like someone
around to cook breakfast and sweep the place out."
"Clean the place out."
"I don't mind the watch and the radio, but it really hurt, losing those boots. They were a thing of
beauty and a joy forever." Guidry leaned forward, and glanced at Allerton. "I don't know whether I
ought to say things like this in front of Junior here. No offense, kid."
"Go ahead," said Allerton.
"Did I tell you how I made the cop on the beat?
He's the vigilante, the watchman out where I live. Every time he sees the light on in my room, he
comes in for a shot of rum. Well, about five nights ago he caught me when I was drunk and
horny, and one thing led to another and I ended up showing him how the cow ate the cabbage. . .
.
"So the night after I make him I was walking by the beer joint on the corner and he comes out
borracho and says, 'Have a drink.' I said, 'I don't want a drink,' So he takes out his pistola and
says, 'Have a drink.' I proceeded to take his pistola away from him, and he goes into the beer
joint to phone for reinforcements. So I had to go in and rip the phone off the wall. Now they're
billing me for the phone. When I got back to my room, which is on the ground floor, he had written
'El Puto Gringo' on the window with soap. So, instead of wiping it off, I left it there. It pays to
advertise."
The drinks kept coming. Allerton went to the W.C. and got in a conversation at the bar when he
returned. Guidry was accusing Hyman of being queer and pretending not to be. Lee was trying to
explain to Guidry that Hyman wasn't really queer, and Guidry said to him, "He's queer and you
aren't, Lee. You just go around pretending you're queer to get in on the act."
"Who wants to get in on your tired old act?" Lee said. He saw Allerton at the bar talking to John
Dum
Dume belonged to a small clique of queers who made their headquarters in a beer joint on
Campeche called The Green Lantern. Dum himself was not an obvious queer, but the other
Green Lantern boys were screaming fags who would not have been welcome at the Ship Ahoy.
Lee walked over to the bar and started talking to the bartender. He thought, "I hope Dum tells
him about me." Lee felt uncomfortable in dramatic "something-I-have-to-tell-you" routines and he
knew, from unnerving experience, the difficulties of a casual come-on: "I'm queer, you know, by
the way." Sometimes they don't hear right and yell, "What?" Or you toss in: "If you were as queer
as I am." The other yawns and changes the subject, and you don't know whether he understood
or not.
The bartender was saying, "She asks me why I drink. What can I tell her? I don't know why. Why
did you have the monkey on your back? Do you know why? There isn't any why, but try to explain
that to someone like Jerri. Try to explain that to any woman." Lee nodded sympathetically. "She
says to me, why don't you get more sleep and eat better? She don't understand and I can't
explain it. Nobody can explain it."
The bartender moved away to wait on some customers. Dum came over to Lee. "How do you
like this character?" he said, indicating Allerton with a wave of his beer bottle. Allerton was across
the room talking to Mary and a chess player from Peru. "He comes to me and says, 'I thought you
were one of the Green Lantern boys.' So I said, "Well, I am.' He wants me to take him around to
some of the gay places here."
Lee and Allerton went to see Cocteau's Orpheus. In the dark theater Lee could feel his body pull
towards Allerton, an amoeboid protoplasmic projection, straining with a blind worm hunger to
enter the other's body, to breathe with his lungs, see with his eyes, learn the feel of his viscera
and genitals. Allerton shifted in his seat. Lee felt a sharp twinge, a strain or dislocation of the
spirit. His eyes ached. He took off his glasses and ran his hand over his closed eyes.
When they left the theater, Lee felt exhausted. He fumbled and bumped into things. His voice was
toneless with strain. He put his hand up to his head from time to time, an awkward, involuntary
gesture of pain. "I need a drink," he said. He pointed to a bar across the street. "There," he said.
He sat down in a booth and ordered a double tequila. Allerton ordered rum and Coke. Lee drank
the tequila straight down, listening down into himself for the effect. He ordered another.
"What did you think of the picture?" Lee asked.
"Enjoyed parts of it."
"Yes." Lee nodded, pursing his lips and looking down into his empty glass. "So did I." He
pronounced the words very carefully, like an elocution teacher.
"He always gets some innaresting effects." Lee laughed. Euphoria was spreading from his
stomach. He drank half the second tequila. "The innaresting thing about Cocteau is his ability to
bring the myth alive in modern terms."
"Ain't it the truth?" said Allerton.
They went to a Russian restaurant for dinner. Lee looked through the menu. "By the way," he
said, "the law was in putting the bite on the Ship Ahoy again. Vice squad. Two hundred pesos. I
can see them in the station house after a hard day shaking down citizens of the Federal District.
One cop says, 'Ah, Gonzalez, you should see what I got today. Oh la la, such a bite!"
"'Aah, you shook down a puto queer for two pesetas in a bus station crapper. We know you,
Hernandez, and your cheap tricks. You're the cheapest cop inna Federal District.'"
Lee waved to the waiter. "Hey, Jack. Dos martinis, much dry. Seco. And dos plates Sheeshka
Babe. Sabe?n
The waiter nodded. "That's two dry martinis and two orders of shish kebab. Right, gentlemen?"
"Solid, Pops. . . . So how was your evening with Dum?"
"We went to several bars full of queers. One place a character asked me to dance and
propositioned me."
"Take him up?"
"No."
"Dum is a nice fellow."
Allerton smiled. "Yes, but he is not a person I would confide too much in. That is, anything I
wanted to keep private."
"You refer to a specific indiscretion?"
"Frankly, yes."
"I see." Lee thought, "Dum never misses."
The waiter put two martinis on the table. Lee held his martini up to the candle, looking at it with
distaste. "The inevitable watery martini with a decomposing olive," he said.
Lee bought a lottery ticket from a boy of ten or so, who had rushed in when the waiter went to the
kitchen. The boy was working the last-ticket routine. Lee paid him expansively, like a drunk
American.
"Go buy yourself some marijuana, son," he said. The boy smiled and turned to leave. "Come back
in five years and make an easy ten pesos," Lee called after him.
Allerton smiled. "Thank god," Lee thought. "I won't have to contend with middle-class morality."
"Here you are, sir," said the waiter, placing the shish kebab on the table.
Lee ordered two glasses of red wine. "So Dum told you about my, uh, proclivities?" he said
abruptly.
"Yes," said Allerton, his mouth full.
"A curse. Been in our family for generations. The Lees have always been perverts. I shall never
forget the unspeakable horror that froze the lymph in my glandsthe lymph glands that is, of
course when the baneful word seared my reeling brain: I was a homosexual. I thought of the
painted, simpering female impersonators I had seen in a Baltimore night club. Could it be
possible that I was one of those subhuman things? I walked the streets in a daze, like a man with
a light concussionjust a minute, Doctor Kildare, this isn't your script. I might well have
destroyed myself, ending an existence which seemed to offer nothing but grotesque misery and
humiliation. Nobler, I thought, to die a man than live on, a sex monster. It was a wise old queen
Bobo, we called herwho taught me that I had a duty to live and to bear my burden proudly for
all to see, to conquer prejudice and ignorance and hate with knowledge and sincerity and love.
Whenever you are threatened by a hostile presence, you emit a thick cloud of love like an
octopus squirts out ink. . . .
"Poor Bobo came to a sticky end. He was riding in the Duc de Ventre's Hispano-Suiza when his
falling piles blew out of the car and wrapped around the rear wheel. He was completely gutted,
leaving an empty shell sitting there on the giraffe-skin upholstery. Even the eyes and the brain
went, with a horrible shlupping sound. The Duc says he will carry that ghastly shlup with him to
his mausoleum. . . .
"Then I knew the meaning of loneliness. But Bobo's words came back to me from the tomb, the
sibilants cracking gently. 'No one is ever really alone. You are part of everything alive.' The
difficulty is to convince someone else he is really part of you, so what the hell? Us parts ought to
work together. Reet?"
Lee paused, looking at Allerton speculatively. "Just where do I stand with the kid?" he wondered.
He had listened politely, smiling at intervals. "What I mean is, Allerton, we are all parts of a
tremendous whole. No use fighting it." Lee was getting tired of the routine. He looked around
restlessly for some place to put it down. "Don't these gay bars depress you? Of course, the queer
bars here aren't to compare with Stateside queer joints."
"I wouldn't know," said Allerton. "I've never been in any queer joints except those Dum took me
to. I guess there's kicks and kicks."
"You haven't, really?"
"No, never."
Lee paid the bill and they walked out into the cool night. A crescent moon was clear and green in
the sky. They walked aimlessly.
"Shall we go to my place for a drink? I have some Napoleon brandy."
"All right," said AUerton.
'This is a completely unpretentious little brandy, you understand, none of this tourist treacle with
obvious effects of flavoring, appealing to the mass tongue. My brandy has no need of shoddy
devices to shock and coerce the palate. Come along." Lee called a cab.
'Three pesos to Insurgentes and Monterrey," Lee said to the driver in his atrocious Spanish. The
driver said four. Lee waved him on. The driver muttered something, and opened the door.
Inside, Lee turned to Allerton. 'The man plainly harbors subversive thoughts. You know, when I
was at Princeton, Communism was the thing. To come out flat for private property and a class
society, you marked yourself a stupid lout or suspect to be a High Episcopalian pederast. But I
held out against the infectionof Communism I mean, of course."
"Aqu." Lee handed three pesos to the driver, who muttered some more and started the car with a
vicious clash of gears.
"Sometimes I think they don't like us," said Allerton.
"I don't mind people disliking me," Lee said. "The question is, what are they in a position to do
about it? Apparently nothing, at present. They don't have the green light. This driver, for example,
hates gringos. But if he kills someoneand very possibly he willit will not be an American. It
will be another Mexican. Maybe his good friend. Friends are less frightening than strangers."
Lee opened the door of his apartment and turned on the light. The apartment was pervaded by
seemingly hopeless disorder. Here and there, ineffectual attempts had been made to arrange
things in piles. There were no lived-in touches. No pictures, no decorations. Clearly, none of the
furniture was his. But Lee's presence permeated the apartment. A coat over the back of a chair
and a hat on the table were immediately recognizable as belonging to Lee.
"I'll fix you a drink." Lee got two water glasses from the kitchen and poured two inches of Mexican
brandy in each glass.
Allerton tasted the brandy. "Good Lord," he said. "Napoleon must have pissed in this one."
"I was afraid of that. An untutored palate. Your generation has never learned the pleasures that a
trained palate confers on the disciplined few."
Lee took a long drink of the brandy. He attempted an ecstatic "aah," inhaled some of the brandy,
and began to cough. "It is god-awful," he said when he could talk. "Still, better than California
brandy. It has a suggestion of cognac taste."
There was a long silence. Allerton was sitting with his head leaning back against the couch. His
eyes were half closed.
"Can I show you over the house?" said Lee, standing up. "In here we have the bedroom."
Allerton got to his feet slowly. They went into the bedroom, and Allerton lay down on the bed and
lit a cigarette. Lee sat in the only chair.
"More brandy?" Lee asked. Allerton nodded. Lee sat down on the edge of the bed, and filled his
glass and handed it to him. Lee touched his sweater. "Sweet stuff, dearie," he said. "That wasn't
made in Mexico."
"I bought it in Scotland," he said. He began to hiccough violently, and got up and rushed for the
bathroom.
Lee stood in the doorway. "Too bad," he said.
"What could be the matter? You didn't drink much." He filled a glass with water and handed it to
Allerton. "You all right now?" he asked.
"Yes, I think so." Allerton lay down on the bed again.
Lee reached out a hand and touched Allerton's ear, and caressed the side of his face. Allerton
reached up and covered one of Lee's hands and squeezed it.
"Let's get this sweater off."
"O.K.," said Allerton. He took off the sweater and then lay down again. Lee took off his own shoes
and shirt. He opened Allerton's shirt and ran his hand down Allerton's ribs and stomach, which
contracted beneath his fingers. "God, you're skinny," he said.
"I'm pretty small."
Lee took off Allerton's shoes and socks. He loosened Allerton's belt and unbuttoned his trousers.
Allerton arched his body, and Lee pulled the trousers and drawers off. He dropped his own
trousers and shorts and lay down beside him. Allerton responded without hostility or disgust, but
in his eyes Lee saw a curious detachment, the impersonal calm of an animal or a child.
Later, when they lay side by side smoking, Lee said, "Oh, by the way, you said you had a camera
in pawn you were about to lose?" It occurred to Lee that to bring the matter up at this time was
not tactful, but he decided the other was not the type to take offense.
"Yes. In for four hundred pesos. The ticket runs out next Wednesday."
"Well, let's go down tomorrow and get it out." Allerton raised one bare shoulder off the sheet.
"O.K.,"he said.
Friday night Allerton went to work. He was taking his roommate's place proofreading for an
English newspaper.
Saturday night Lee met Allerton in the Cuba, a bar with an interior like the set for a surrealist
ballet. The walls were covered with murals depicting underwater scenes. Mermaids and mermen
in elaborate arrangements with huge goldfish stared at the customers with fixed, identical
expressions of pathic dismay. Even the fish were invested with an air of ineffectual alarm. The
effect was disquieting, as though these androgynous beings were frightened by something behind
or to one side of the customers, who were made uneasy by this inferred presence. Most of them
took their business someplace else.
Allerton was somewhat sullen, and Lee felt depressed and ill at ease until he had put down two
martinis. "You know, Allerton . . . ," he said after a long silence. Allerton was humming to himself,
drumming on the table and looking around restlessly. Now he stopped humming, and raised an
eyebrow.
"This punk is getting too smart," Lee thought. He knew he had no way of punishing him for
indifference or insolence.
"They have the most incompetent tailors in Mexico I have encountered in all my experience as a
traveller. Have you had any work done?" Lee looked pointedly at Allerton's shabby clothes. He
was as careless of his clothes as Lee was. "Apparently not. Take this tailor I'm hung up with.
Simple job. I bought a pair of ready-made trousers. Never took time for a fitting. Both of us could
get in those pants."
"It wouldn't look right," said Allerton.
"People would think we were Siamese twins. Did I ever tell you about the Siamese twin who
turned his brother in to the law to get him off the junk? But to get back to this tailor. I took the
pants in with another pair. These pants is too voluminous,' I told him. 'I want them sewed down to
the same size as this other pair here.' He promised to do the job in two days. That was more than
two months ago. 'Maana,' 'ms tarde,' 'ahora,' 'ahorita,' and every time I come to pick up the
pants it's 'todava no'not yet. Yesterday I had all the 'ahora' routine I can stand still for. So I told
him, 'Ready or no, give me my pants.' The pants was all cut down the seams. I told him, Two
months and all you have done is disembowel my trousers.' I took them to another tailor and told
him, 'Sew them up.' Are you hungry?"
"I am, as a matter of fact."
"How about Pat's Steak House?"
"Good idea."
Pat's served excellent steaks. Lee liked the place because it was never crowded. At Pat's he
ordered a double dry martini. Allerton had rum and Coke. Lee began talking about telepathy.
"I know telepathy to be a fact, since I have experienced it myself. I have no interest to prove it, or,
in fact, to prove anything to anybody. What interests me is, how can I use it? In South America at
the headwaters of the Amazon grows a plant called Yage that is supposed to increase telepathic
sensitivity. Medicine men use it in their work. A Colombian scientist, whose name escapes me,
isolated from Yage a drug he called Telepathine. I read all this in a magazine article.
"Later I see another articlethe Russians are using Yage in experiments on slave labor. It seems
they want to induce states of automatic obedience and ultimately, of course, thought control. The
basic con. No build-up, no spiel, no routine, just move in on someone's psyche and give orders. I
have a theory the Mayan priests developed a form of one-way telepathy to con the peasants into
doing all the work. The deal is certain to backfire eventually, because telepathy is not of its nature
a one-way setup, nor a setup of sender and receiver at all.
"By now the U.S. is experimenting with Yage, unless they are dumber even than I think. Yage
may be a means to usable knowledge of telepathy. Anything that can be accomplished
chemically can be accomplished in other ways." Lee saw that Allerton was not especially
interested, and dropped the subject.
"Did you read about the old Jew who tried to smuggle out ten pounds of gold sewed in his
overcoat?"
"No. What about it?"
"Well, this old Jew was nailed at the airport on his way to Cuba. I hear they got like a mine finder
out at the airport rings a bell if anybody passes the gate with an outlandish quantity of metal on
his person. So it says in the papers, after they give this Jew a shake and find the gold, a large
number of Jewish-looking foreigners were seen looking into the airport window in a state of
excitement. 'Oy, gefilte fish! They are putting the snatch on Abe!' Back in Roman times the Jews
rose upin Jerusalem I think it wasand killed fifty thousand Romans. The she-Jewsthat is,
the young Jewish ladies, I must be careful not to lay myself open to a charge of anti-Semitism
done strip teases with Roman intestines.
"Speaking of intestines, did I ever tell you about my friend Reggie? One of the unsung heroes of
British Intelligence. Lost his ass and ten feet of lower intestine in the service. Lived for years
disguised as an Arab boy known only as 'Number 69' at headquarters. That was wishful thinking,
though, because the Arabs are strictly one way. Well, a rare Oriental disease set in, and poor
Reggie lost the bulk of his tripes. For God and country, what? He didn't want any speeches, any
medals, just to know that he had served, that was enough. Think of those patient years, waiting
for another piece of the jigsaw puzzle to fall into place.
"You never hear of operators like Reggie, but it is their information, gathered in pain and danger,
that gives some front-line general the plan for a brilliant counter-offensive and covers his chest
with medals. For example, Reggie was the first to guess the enemy was running short of petrol
when the K. Y. jelly gave out, and that was only one of his brilliant coups. How about the T-bone
steak for two?"
"That's fine."
"Rare?"
"Medium rare."
Lee was looking at the menu. "They list baked Alaska," he said. "Ever eat it?"
"No."
"Real good. Hot on the outside and cold inside."
"That's why they call it baked Alaska I imagine."
"Got an idea for a new dish. Take a live pig and throw it into a very hot oven so the pig is roasted
outside and when you cut into it, it's still alive and twitching inside. Or, if we run a dramatic joint, a
screaming pig covered with burning brandy rushes out of the kitchen and dies right by your chair.
You can reach down and pull off the crispy, crackly ears and eat them with your cocktails."
Outside, the City lay under a violet haze. A warm spring wind blew through the trees in the park.
They walked through the park back to Lee's place, occasionally stopping to lean against each
other, weak from laughing. A Mexican said, "Cabrones," as he walked by. Lee called after him,
"Chinga tu madre," then added in English, "Here I come to your little jerkwater country and spend
my good American dollars and what happens? Insulted inna public street." The Mexican turned,
hesitating, Lee unbuttoned his coat and hooked his thumb under the pistol at his waistband. The
Mexican walked on.
"Someday they won't walk away," said Lee.
At Lee's apartment they had some brandy. Lee put his arm around Allerton's shoulder.
"Well, if you insist," said Allerton.
Sunday night Allerton had dinner at Lee's apartment. Lee cooked chicken livers, because Allerton
always wanted to order chicken liver in restaurants, and usually restaurant chicken liver isn't
fresh. After dinner Lee began making love to Allerton, but he rejected Lee's advances and said he
wanted to go to the Ship Ahoy and drink a rum Coke. Lee turned out the light and embraced
Allerton before they started out the door. Allerton's body was rigid with annoyance.
When they arrived at the Ship Ahoy, Lee went to the bar and ordered two rum Cokes. "Make
those extra strong," he said to the bartender.
Allerton was sitting at a table with Mary. Lee brought the rum Coke over and set it down by
Allerton. Then he sat down at a table with Joe Guidry. Joe Guidry had a young man with him. The
young man was telling how he was treated by an Army psychiatrist. "So what did you find out
from your psychiatrist?" said Guidry. His voice had a nagging, derogatory edge.
"I found out I was an Oedipus, I found out I love my mother."
"Why, everybody loves their mother, son," said Guidry.
"I mean I love my mother physically."
"I don't believe that, son," said Guidry. This struck Lee as funny, and he began to laugh.
"I hear Jim Cochan has gone back to the States," said Guidry. "He plans to work in Alaska."
"Thank God I am a gentleman of independent means, and don't have to expose myself to the
inclemencies of near-Arctic conditions," said Lee. "By the way, did you ever meet Jim's wife,
Alice? My god, she is an American bitch that won't quit. I never yet see her equal. Jim does not
have one friend he can take to the house. She has forbidden him to eat out, as she does not want
he should take in any nourishment unless she is there to watch him eat it. Did you ever hear the
likes of that? Needless to say, my place is out of bounds to Jim, and he always has that hunted
look when he comes to see me. I don't know why American men put up with such shit from a
woman.
Of course I am no expert judge of female flesh, but Alice has 'lousy lay' writ all over her scrawny,
unappetizing person."
"You're coming on mighty bitchy tonight, Lee," said Guidry.
"And not without reason. Did I tell you about this Wigg person? He is an American hipster around
town, a junky who is said to play a cool bass fiddle. Strictly on the chisel, even though he has
gold, and he's always mooching junk, saying 'No, I don't want to buy any. I'm kicking. I just want
half a fix.' I have had all I can stand still for from this character. Driving around in a new threethousand-
dollar Chrysler, and too cheap to buy his own junk. What am I, the Junky's Benevolent
Society for christ sake? This Wigg is as ugly as people get."
"You making it with him?" asked Guidry, which seemed to shock his young friend.
"Not even. I got bigger fish to fry," said Lee. He glanced over at Allerton, who was laughing at
something Mary had said.
"Fish is right," quipped Guidry. "Cold, slippery, and hard to catch."
Lee had an appointment with Allerton for eleven o'clock Monday morning to go to the National
Pawn Shop and get his camera out of hock. Lee came to Allerton's room and woke him up
exactly at eleven. Allerton was sullen. He seemed on the point of going back to sleep. Finally Lee
said, "Well, are you going to get up now, or . . ."
Allerton opened his eyes and blinked like a turtle. "I'm getting up," he said.
Lee sat down and read a newspaper, careful to avoid watching Allerton dress. He was trying to
control his hurt and anger, and the effort exhausted him. A heavy drag slowed movement and
thought. Lee's face was rigid, his voice toneless. The strain continued through breakfast. Alierton
sipped tomato juice in silence.
It took all day to get the camera. Alierton had lost the ticket. They went from one office to another.
The officials shook their heads and drummed on the table, waiting. Lee put out two hundred
pesos extra in bites. He finally paid the four hundred pesos, plus interest and various charges. He
handed the camera to Alierton, who took it without comment.
They went back to the Ship Ahoy in silence. Lee went in and ordered a drink. Alierton
disappeared. About an hour later he came in and sat with Lee.
"How about dinner tonight?" asked Lee.
Allerton said, "No, I think I'll work tonight."
Lee was depressed and shattered. The warmth and laughter of Saturday night was lost, and he
did not know why. In any relation of love or friendship Lee attempted to establish contact on the
non-verbal level of intuition, a silent exchange of thought and feeling. Now Alierton had abruptly
shut off contact, and Lee felt a physical pain as though a part of himself tentatively stretched out
towards the other had been severed, and he was looking at the bleeding stump in shock and
disbelief.
Lee said, "Like the Wallace administration, I subsidize non-production. I will pay you twenty pesos
not to work tonight." Lee was about to develop the idea, but Allerton's impatient coolness stopped
him. He fell silent, looking at Allerton with shocked, hurt eyes.
Allerton was nervous and irritable, drumming on the table and looking around. He did not himself
understand why Lee annoyed him.
"How about a drink?" Lee said.
"No. Not now. Anyway, I have to go."
Lee got up jerkily. "Well, I'll see you," he said. "I'll see you tomorrow."
"Yes. Good night."
He left Lee standing there, trying to formulate a plan to keep Allerton from going, to make an
appointment for the next day, to mitigate in some way the hurt he had received.
Allerton was gone. Lee felt for the back of his chair and lowered himself into it, like a man weak
from illness. He stared at the table, his thoughts slow, as if he were very cold.
The bartender placed a sandwich in front of Lee. "Huh?" said Lee. "What's this?"
"The sandwich you ordered."
"Oh, yes." Lee took a few bites out of the sandwich, washing it down with water. "On my bill, Joe,"
he called to the bartender.
He got up and walked out. He walked slowly. Several times he leaned on a tree, looking at the
ground as if his stomach hurt. Inside his apartment he took off his coat and shoes, and sat down
on the bed. His throat began to ache, moisture hit his eyes, and he fell across the bed, sobbing
convulsively. He pulled his knees up and covered his face with his hands, the fists clenched.
Towards morning he turned on his back and stretched out. The sobs stopped, and his face
relaxed in the morning light.
Lee woke up around noon, and sat for a long time on the edge of the bed with one shoe dangling
from his hand. He dabbed water on his eyes, put on his coat, and went out.
Lee went down to the Zcalo and wandered around for several hours. His mouth was dry. He
went into a Chinese restaurant, sat down in a booth and ordered a Coke. Misery spread through
his body, now that he was sitting down with no motion to distract him. "What happened?" he
wondered.
He forced himself to look at the facts. Allerton was not queer enough to make a reciprocal relation
possible. Lee's affection irritated him. Like many people who have nothing to do, he was resentful
of any claims on his time. He had no close friends. He disliked definite appointments. He did not
like to feel that anybody expected anything from him. He wanted, so far as possible, to live
without external pressure. Allerton resented Lee's action in paying to recover the camera. He felt
he was "being sucked in on a phony deal," and that an obligation he did not want had been thrust
upon him.
Allerton did not recognize friends who made six-hundred-peso gifts, nor could he feel comfortable
exploiting Lee. He made no attempt to clarify the situation. He did not want to see the
contradiction involved in resenting a favor which he accepted. Lee found that he could tune in on
Allerton's viewpoint, though the process caused him pain, since it involved seeing the extent of
Allerton's indifference. "I liked him and I wanted him to like me," Lee thought. "I wasn't trying to
buy anything."
"I have to leave town," he decided. "Go somewhere. Panama, South America." He went down to
the station to find out when the next train left for Veracruz. There was a train that night, but he did
not buy a ticket. A feeling of cold desolation came over him at the thought of arriving alone in
another country, far away from Allerton.
Lee took a cab to the Ship Ahoy. Allerton was not there, and Lee sat at the bar for three hours,
drinking. Finally Allerton looked in the door, waved to Lee vaguely, and went upstairs with Mary.
Lee knew they had probably gone to the owner's apartment, where they often ate dinner.
He went up to Tom Weston's apartment. Mary and Allerton were there. Lee sat down and tried to
engage Allerton's interest, but he was too drunk to make sense. His attempt to carry on a casual,
humorous conversation was painful to watch.
Ale must have slept. Mary and Allerton were gone. Tom Weston brought him some hot coffee. He
drank the coffee, got up and staggered out of the apartment. Exhausted, he slept till the following
morning.
Scenes from the chaotic, drunken month passed before his eyes. There was a face he did not
recognize, a good-looking kid with amber eyes, yellow hair and beautiful straight black eyebrows.
He saw himself asking someone he barely knew to buy him a beer in a bar on Insurgentes, and
getting a nasty brush. He saw himself pull a gun on someone who followed him out of a clip joint
on Coahuila and tried to roll him. He felt the friendly, steadying hands of people who had helped
him home. "Take it easy, Bill." His childhood friend Rollins standing there, solid and virile, with his
elkhound. Carl running for a streetcar. Moor with his malicious hitch smile. The faces blended
together in a nightmare, speaking to him in strange moaning idiot voices that he could not
understand at first, and finally could not hear.
Lee got up and shaved and felt better. He found he could eat a roll and drink some coffee. He
smoked and read the paper, trying not to think about Allerton. Presently he went downtown and
looked through the gun stores. He found a bargain in a Colt Frontier, which he bought for two
hundred pesos. A 32-20 in perfect condition, serial number in the three hundred thousands.
Worth at least a hundred dollars Stateside.
Lee went to the American bookstore and bought a book on chess. He took the book out to
Chapultepec, sat down in a soda stand on the lagoon, and began to read. Directly in front of him
was an island with a huge cypress tree growing on it. Hundreds of vultures roosted in the tree.
Lee wondered what they ate. He threw a piece of bread, which landed on the island. The vultures
paid no attention.
Lee was interested in the theory of games and the strategy of random behavior. As he had
supposed, the theory of games does not apply to chess, since chess rules out the element of
chance and approaches elimination of the unpredictable human factor. If the mechanism of chess
were completely understood, the outcome could be predicted after any initial move. "A game for
thinking machines," Lee thought. He read on, smiling from time to time. Finally he got up, sailed
the book out over the lagoon, and walked away.
Lee knew he could not find what he wanted with Allerton. The court of fact had rejected his
petition. But Lee could not give up. "Perhaps I can discover a way to change fact," he thought. He
was ready to take any risk, to proceed to any extreme of action. Like a saint or a wanted criminal
with nothing to lose, Lee had stepped beyond the claims of his nagging, cautious, aging,
frightened flesh.
He took a taxi to the Ship Ahoy. Allerton was standing in front of the Ship Ahoy, blinking
sluggishly in the sunlight. Lee looked at him and smiled. Allerton smiled back.
"How are you?"
"Sleepy. Just got up." He yawned and started into the Ship Ahoy. He moved one hand"See
you" and sat down at the bar and ordered tomato juice. Lee went in and sat beside him, and
ordered a double rum Coke. Allerton moved and sat down at a table with Tom Weston. "Bring the
tomato juice over here, will you, Joe?" he called to the bartender.
Lee sat at the table next to Allerton's. Tom Weston was leaving. Allerton followed him out. He
came back in and sat in the other room, reading the papers. Mary came in and sat down with him.
After talking for a few minutes, they set up the chess board.
Lee had thrown down three drinks. He walked over and pulled up a chair to the table where Mary
and Allerton were playing chess. "Howdy," he said. "Don't mind if I kibitz?"
Mary looked up annoyed, but smiled when she met Lee's steady, reckless gaze.
"I was reading up on chess. Arabs invented it, and I'm not surprised. Nobody can sit like an Arab.
The classical Arab chess game was simply a sitting contest. When both contestants starved to
death it was a stalemate." Lee paused and took a long drink.
"During the Baroque period of chess the practice of harrying your opponent with some annoying
mannerism came into general use. Some players used dental floss, others cracked their joints or
blew saliva bubbles. The method was constantly developed. In the 1917 match at Baghdad, the
Arab Arachnid Khayam defeated the German master Kurt Schlemiel by humming 'I'll Be Around
When You're Gone' forty-thousand times, and each time reaching his hand towards the board as
if he intended to make a move. Schlemiel went into convulsions finally.
"Did you ever have the good fortune to see the Italian master Tetrazzini perform?" Lee lit Mary's
cigarette. "I say 'perform' advisedly, because he was a great showman, and like all showmen, not
above charlatanism and at times downright trickery. Sometimes he used smoke screens to hide
his maneuvers from the oppositionI mean literal smoke screens, of course. He had a corps of
trained idiots who would rush in at a given signal and eat all the pieces. With defeat staring him in
the faceas it often did, because actually he knew nothing of chess but the rules and wasn't too
sure of thosehe would leap up yelling, 'You cheap bastard! I saw you palm that queen!' and
ram a broken teacup into his opponent's face. In 1922 he was rid out of Prague on a rail. The
next time I saw Tetrazzini was in the Upper Ubangi. A complete wreck. Peddling unlicensed
condoms. That was the year of the rinderpest, when everything died, even the hyenas."
Lee paused. The routine was coming to him like dictation. He did not know what he was going to
say next, but he suspected the monologue was about to get dirty. He looked at Mary. She was
exchanging significant glances with Allerton. "Some sort of lover code," Lee decided. "She is
telling him they have to go now." Allerton got up, saying he had to have a haircut before going to
work. Mary and Allerton left. Lee was alone in the bar.
The monologue continued. "I was working as Aide-de-camp under General Von Klutch. Exacting.
A hard man to satisfy. I gave up trying after the first week. We had a saying around the
wardroom: 'Never expose your flank to old Klutchy.' Well, I couldn't take Klutchy another night, so
I assembled a modest caravan and hit the trail with Abdul, the local Adonis. Ten miles out of
Tanhajaro, Abdul came down with the rinderpest and I had to leave him there to die. Hated to do
it, but there was no other way. Lost his looks completely, you understand.
"At the headwaters of the Zambesi, I ran into an old Dutch trader. After considerable haggling I
gave him a keg of paregoric for a boy, half Effendi and half Lulu. I figured the boy would get me
as far as Timbuktu, maybe all the way to Dakar. But the Lulu-Effendi was showing signs of wear
even before I hit Timbuktu, and I decided to trade him in on a straight Bedouin model. The
crossbreeds make a good appearance, but they don't hold up. In Timbuktu I went to Corn Hole
Gus's Used-Slave Lot to see what he could do for me on a trade-in.
"Gus rushes out and goes into the spiel: 'Ah, Sahib Lee. Allah has sent you! I have something
right up your ass, I mean, alley. Just came in. One owner and he was a doctor. A once-overlightly,
twice-a-week-type citizen. It's young and it's tender. In fact, it talks baby talk . . . behold!'
"'You call those senile slobberings baby talk? My grandfather got a clap off that one. Come again,
Gussie. '
"'You do not like it? A pity. Well, everyone has a taste, feller say. Now here I have a one-hundredpercent
desert-bred Bedouin with a pedigree goes straight back to the Prophet. Dig his bearing.
Such pride! Such fire!'
"'A good appearance job, Gus, but not good enough. It's an albino Mongolian idiot. Look, Gussie,
you are dealing with the oldest faggot in the Upper Ubangi, so come off the peg. Reach down into
your grease pit and dredge out the best-looking punk you got in this moth-eaten bazaar.'
"'All right Sahib Lee, you want quality, right? Follow me, please. Here it is. What can I say?
Quality speaks for itself. Now, I get a lotta cheap-type customers in here wanna see quality and
then scream at the price. But you know and I know that quality runs high. As a matter of fact, and
this I swear by the Prophet's prick, I lose money on this quality merchandise.'
"'Uh huh. Got some hidden miles on him, but he'll do. How about a trial run?'
"'Lee, for christ sake, I don't run a house. This joint is strictly package. No consumption on
premises. I could lose my license.'
"'I don't aim to get caught short with one of your Scotch-tape and household-cement
reconditioned jobs a hundred miles from the nearest Soukh. Besides, how do I know it ain't a
Liz?'
"'Sahib Lee! This is an ethical lot!'
"'I was beat that way one time in Marrakesh. Citizen passed a transvestite Jew Lizzie on me as
an Abyssinian prince.'
"'Ha ha ha, full of funny jokes, aren't you? How is this: stay over in town tonight and try it out. If
you don't want it in the morning, I refund every piaster. Fair enough?'
"'O. K., now, what can you give me on this Lulu-Effendi? Perfect condition. Just overhauled. He
don't eat much and he don't say nothing.'
"'Jesus, Lee! You know I'd cut off my right nut for you, but I swear by my mother's cunt, may I fall
down and be paralyzed and my prick fall off if these mixed jobs ain't harder to move than a
junky's bowels.'
"'Skip the routine. How much?' "Gus stands in front of the Lulu-Effendi with his hands on his hips.
He smiles and shakes his head. He walks around the boy. He reaches in and points to a small,
slightly varicose vein behind the knee. 'Look at that,' he says, still smiling and shaking his head.
He walks around again. . . . 'Got piles too.' He shakes his head. 'I don't know. I really don't know
what to say to you. Open up, kid. . . . Two teeth missing.' Gus has stopped smiling. He is talking
in low, considerate tones, like an undertaker.
"'I'm going to be honest with you, Lee. I've got a lotful of this stuff now. I'd rather just forget this
job and talk cash on the other.'
"'What am I going to do with it? Peddle it on the public street?'
"'Might take it along as a spare. Ha, ha. . . .'
"'Ha. What can you give me?'
"'Well . . . now don't get mad . . . two hundred piasters.' Gus makes a skittish little run as if to
escape my anger, and throws up a huge cloud of dust in the courtyard."
The routine ended suddenly, and Lee looked around. The bar was nearly empty. He paid for his
drinks and walked out into the night.
Thursday Lee went to the races, on the recommendation of Tom Weston. Weston was an
amateur astrologer, and he assured Lee the signs were right. Lee lost five races, and took a taxi
back to the Ship Ahoy.
Mary and Allerton were sitting at a table with the Peruvian chess player. Allerton asked Lee to
come over and sit down at the table.
"Where's that phony whore caster?" Lee said, looking around.
"Tom give you a bum steer?" asked Allerton.
"He did that."
Mary left with the Peruvian. Lee finished his third drink and turned to Allerton. "I figure to go down
to South America soon," he said. "Why don't you come along? Won't cost you a cent."
"Perhaps not in money."
"I'm not a difficult man to get along with. We could reach a satisfactory arrangement. What you
got to lose?"
"Independence."
"So who's going to cut in on your independence? You can lay all the women in South America if
you want to. All I ask is be nice to Papa, say twice a week. That isn't excessive, is it? Besides, I
will buy you a round-trip ticket so you can leave at your discretion."
Allerton shrugged. "I'll think it over," he said. "This job runs ten days more. I'll give you a definite
answer when the job folds."
"Your job. . . ." Lee was about to say, "I'll give you ten days' salary." He said, "All right."
Allerton's newspaper job was temporary, and he was too lazy to hold a job in any case.
Consequently his answer meant "No." Lee figured to talk him over in ten days. "Better not force
the issue now," he thought.
Allerton planned a three-day trip to Morelia with his co-workers in the newspaper office. The night
before he left, Lee was in a state of manic excitement. He collected a noisy table full of people.
Allerton was playing chess with Mary, and Lee made all the noise he could. He kept his table
laughing, but they all looked vaguely uneasy, as if they would prefer to be someplace else. They
thought Lee was a little crazy. But just when he seemed on the point of some scandalous excess
of speech or behavior, he would check himself and say something completely banal.
Lee leaped up to embrace a new arrival. "Ricardo! Amigo mo!" he said. "Haven't seen you in a
dog's age. Where you been? Having a baby? Sit down on your ass, or what's left of it after four
years in the Navy. What's troubling you, Richard? Is it women? I'm glad you came to me instead
of those quacks on the top floor."
At this point Allerton and Mary left, after consulting for a moment in low tones. Lee looked after
them in silence. "I'm playing to an empty house now," he thought. He ordered another rum and
swallowed four Benzedrine tablets. Then he went into the head and smoked a roach of tea. "Now
I will ravish my public," he thought.
The busboy had caught a mouse and was holding it up by the tail. Lee pulled out an oldfashioned
.22 revolver he sometimes carried. "Hold the son of a bitch out and I'll blast it," he said,
striking a Napoleonic pose. The boy tied a string to the mouse's tail and held it out at arm's
length. Lee fired from a distance of three feet. His bullet tore the mouse's head off.
"If you'd got any closer the mouse would have clogged the muzzle," said Richard.
Tom Weston came in. "Here comes the old whore caster," Lee said. 'That retrograde Saturn
dragging your ass, man?"
"My ass is dragging because I need a beer," said Weston.
"Well, you've come to the right place. A beer for my astrologizing friend. . . . What's that? I'm
sorry, old man," Lee said, turning to Weston, "but the bartender say the signs aren't right to serve
you a beer. You see, Venus is in the sixty-ninth house with a randy Neptune and he couldn't let
you have a beer under such auspices." Lee washed down a small piece of opium with black
coffee.
Horace walked in and gave Lee his brief, cold nod. Lee rushed over and embraced him. "This
thing is bigger than both of us, Horace," he said. "Why hide our love?"
Horace thrust out his arms rigidly. "Knock it off," he said. "Knock it off."
"Just a Mexican abrazo, Horace. Custom of the country. Everyone does it down here."
"I don't care what the custom is. Just keep away from me."
"Horace! Why are you so cold?"
Horace said, "Knock it off, will you?" and walked out. A little later he came back and stood at the
end of the bar drinking a beer.
Weston and Al and Richard came over and stood with Lee. "We're with you, Bill," Weston said. "If
he lays a finger on you I'll break a beer bottle over his head."
Lee did not want to push the routine past a joking stage. He said, "Oh, Horace is okay, I guess.
But there's a limit to what I can stand still for. Two years he hands me these curt nods. Two years
he walks into Lola's and looks around'Nothing in here but fags,' he says and goes out on the
street to drink his beer. Like I say, there is a limit."
Allerton came back from his trip to Morelia sullen and irritable. When Lee asked if he had a good
trip, he muttered, "Oh, all right," and went in the other room to play chess with Mary. Lee felt a
charge of anger pass through his body. "I'll make him pay for this somehow," he thought.
Lee considered buying a half-interest in the Ship Ahoy. Allerton existed on credit at the Ship
Ahoy, and owed four hundred pesos. If Lee was half-owner of the joint, Allerton would not be in a
position to ignore him. Lee did not actually want retaliation. He felt a desperate need to maintain
some special contact with Allerton.
Lee managed to re-establish contact. One afternoon Lee and Allerton went to visit Al Hyman, who
was in the hospital with jaundice. On the way home they stopped in the Bottoms Up for a cocktail.
"What about this trip to South America?" Lee said abruptly.
"Well, it's always nice to see places you haven't seen before," said Allerton.
"Can you leave anytime?"
"Anytime."
Next day Lee started collecting the necessary visas and tickets. "Better buy some camping
equipment here," he said. "We may have to trek back into the jungle to find the Yage. When we
get where the Yage is, we'll dig a hip cat and ask him, 'Where can we score for Yage?'"
"How will you know where to look for the Yage?" "I aim to find that out in Bogot. A Colombian
scientist who lives in Bogot isolated Telepathine from Yage. We must find that scientist."
"Suppose he won't talk?"
"They all talk when Boris goes to work on them."
"You Boris?"
"Certainly not. We pick up Boris in Panama. He did excellent work with the Reds in Barcelona
and with the Gestapo in Poland. A talented man. All his work has the Boris touch. Light, but
persuasive. A mild little fellow with spectacles. Looks like a bookkeeper. I met him in a Turkish
bath in Budapest."
A blond Mexican boy went by pushing a cart. "Jesus Christ!" Lee said, his mouth dropping open.
"One of them blond-headed Mexicans! 'Tain't as if it was being queer, Allerton. After all, they's
only Mexicans. Let's have a drink."
They left by bus a few days later, and by the time they reached Panama City, Allerton was
already complaining that Lee was too demanding in his desires. Otherwise, they got on very well.
Now that Lee could spend days and nights with the object of his attentions, he felt relieved of the
gnawing emptiness and fear. And Allerton was a good travelling companion, sensible and calm.
They flew from Panama to Quito, in a tiny plane which had to struggle to climb above an
overcast. The steward plugged in the oxygen. Lee sniffed the oxygen hose. "It's cut!" he said in
disgust.
They drove into Quito in a windy, cold twilight. The hotel looked a hundred years old. The room
had a high ceiling with black beams and white piaster walls. They sat on the beds, shivering. Lee
was a little junk sick.
They walked around the main square. Lee hit a drugstoreno paregoric without a script. A cold
wind from the high mountains blew rubbish through the dirty streets. The people walked by in
gloomy silence. Many had blankets wrapped around their faces. A row of hideous old hags,
huddled in dirty blankets that looked like old burlap sacks, were ranged along the walls of a
church.
"Now, son, I want you to know I am different from other citizens you might run into. Some people
will give you the women-are-no-good routine. I'm not like that. You just pick yourself one of these
seoritas and take her right hack to the hotel with you."
Allerton looked at him. "I think I will get laid tonight," he said.
"Sure," Lee said. "Go right ahead. They don't have much pulchritude in this dump, but that hadn't
oughta deter you young fellers. Was it Frank Harris said he never saw an ugly woman till he was
thirty? It was, as a matter of fact. . . . Let's go back to the hotel and have a drink."
The bar was drafty. Oak chairs with black leather seats. They ordered martinis. At the next table a
red-faced American in an expensive brown gabardine suit was talking about some deal involving
twenty thousand acres. Across from Lee was an Ecuadoran man, with a long nose and a spot of
red on each cheekbone, dressed in a black suit of European cut. He was drinking coffee and
eating sweet cakes.
Lee drank several cocktails. He was getting sicker by the minute. "Why don't you smoke some
weed?" Allerton suggested. 'That might help."
"Good idea. Let's go up to the room."
Lee smoked a stick of tea on the balcony. "My god, is it cold out on that balcony," he said, coming
back into the room.
"'. . . And when twilight falls on the beautiful old colonial city of Quito and those cool breezes steal
down from the Andes, walk out in the fresh of the evening and look over the beautiful seoritas
who seat themselves, in colorful native costume, along the wall of the sixteenth-century church
that overlooks the main square. . . .' They fired the guy wrote that. There are limits, even in a
travel folder. . . .
"Tibet must be about like this. High and cold and full of ugly-looking people and llamas and yaks.
Yak milk for breakfast, yak curds for lunch, and for dinner a yak boiled in his own butter, and a
fitting punishment for a yak, too, if you ask me.
"You can smell one of those holy men ten miles downwind on a clear day. Sitting there pulling on
his old prayer wheel so nasty. Wrapped in dirty old burlap sacks, with bedbugs crawling around
where his neck sticks out of the sack. His nose is all rotted away and he spits betel nut out
through the nose holes like a spitting cobra. . . . Give me that Wisdom-of-the-East routine.
"So we got like a holy man and some bitch reporter comes to interview him. He sits there chewing
on his betel nut. After a while, he says to one of his acolytes, 'Go down to the Sacred Well and
bring me a dipper of paregoric. I'm going to make with the Wisdom of the East. And shake the
lead out of your loin cloth!' So he drinks the P.G. and goes into a light trance, and makes cosmic
contactwe call it going on the nod in the trade. The reporter says, 'Will there be war with
Russia, Mahatma? Will Communism destroy the civilized world? Is the soul immortal? Does God
exist?'
"The Mahatma opens his eyes and compresses his lips and spits two long, red streams of betel
nut juice out through his nose holes. It runs down over his mouth and he licks it back in with a
long, coated tongue and says, 'How in the fuck should I know?' The acolyte says, 'You heard the
man. Now cut. The Swami wants to be alone with his medications.' Come to think of it, that is the
wisdom of the East. The Westerner thinks there is some secret he can discover. The East says,
'How the fuck should I know?'"
That night Lee dreamed he was in a penal colony. All around were high, bare mountains. He lived
in a boardinghouse that was never warm. He went out for a walk. As he stepped off a streetcomer
onto a dirty cobblestone street, the cold mountain wind hit him. He tightened the belt of his leather
jacket and felt the chill of final despair.
Lee woke up and called to Allerton, "Are you awake, Gene?"
"Yes."
"Cold?"
"Yes."
"Can I come over with you?"
"Ahh, well all right."
Lee got in bed with Allerton. He was shaking with cold and junk sickness.
"You're twitching all over," said Allerton. Lee pressed against him, convulsed by the adolescent
lust of junk sickness.
"Christ almighty, your hands are cold."
When Allerton was asleep, he rolled over and threw his knee across Lee's body. Lee lay still so
he wouldn't wake up and move away.
The next day Lee was really sick. They wandered around Quito. The more Lee saw of Quito, the
more the place brought him down. The town was hilly, the streets narrow. Allerton stepped off the
high curb and a car grazed him. "Thank god you're not hurt,"
Lee said. "I sure would hate to be stuck in this town."
They sat down in a little coffeehouse where some German refugees hung out, talking about visas
and extensions and work permits, and got into a conversation with a man at the next table. The
man was thin and blond, his head caved in at the temples. Lee could see the blue veins pulsing in
the cold, high-mountain sunlight that covered the man's weak, ravaged face and spilled over the
scarred oak table onto the worn wooden floor. Lee asked the man if he liked Quito.
"To be or not to be, that is the question. I have to like it."
They walked out of the coffeehouse, and up the street to a park. The trees were stunted by wind
and cold. A few boys were rowing around and around in a small pond. Lee watched them, torn by
lust and curiosity. He saw himself desperately rummaging through bodies and rooms and closets
in a frenzied search, a recurrent nightmare. At the end of the search was an empty room. He
shivered in the cold wind.
Allerton said, "Why don't you ask in the coffee shop for the name of a doctor?"
"That's a good idea."
The doctor lived in a yellow stucco villa on a quiet side street. He was Jewish, with a smooth, red
face, and spoke good English. Lee put down a dysentery routine. The doctor asked a few
questions. He started to write out a prescription. Lee said, "The prescription that works best is
paregoric with bismuth."
The doctor laughed. He gave Lee a long look. Finally he said, "Tell the truth now." He raised a
forefinger, smiling. "Are you addicted to opiates? Better you tell me. Otherwise I cannot help you."
Lee said, "Yes."
"Ah ha," said the doctor, and he crumpled up the prescription he was writing and dropped it in the
wastebasket. He asked Lee how long the addiction had lasted. He shook his head, looking at
Lee.
"Ach," he said, "you are a young person. You must stop this habit. So you lose your life. Better
you should suffer now than continue this habit." The doctor gave Lee a long, human look.
"My god," Lee thought, "what you have to put up with in this business." He nodded and said, "Of
course, Doctor, and I want to stop. But I have to get some sleep. I am going to the coast
tomorrow, to Manta."
The doctor sat back in his chair, smiling. "You must stop this habit." He ran through the routine
again. Lee nodded abstractedly. Finally the doctor reached for his prescription pad: three c.c.'s of
tincture.
The drugstore gave Lee paregoric instead of tincture. Three c.c.'s of P.G. Less than a
teaspoonful. Nothing. Lee bought a bottle of antihistamine tablets and took a handful. They
seemed to help a little.
Lee and Allerton took a plane the next day for Manta.
The Hotel Continental in Manta was made of split bamboo and rough boards. Lee found some
knotholes in the wall of their room, and plugged the holes up with paper. "We don't want to get
deported under a cloud," he said to Allerton. "I'm a little junk sick, you know, and that makes me
sooo sexy. The neighbors could witness some innaresting sights."
"I wish to register a complaint concerning breach of contract," said Allerton. "You said twice a
week."
"So I did. Well, of course the contract is more or less elastic you might say. But you are right.
Twice a week it is, sire. Of course, if you get hot pants between times, don't hesitate to let me
know."
"I'll give you a buzz."
The water was just right for Lee, who could not stand cold water. There was no shock when he
plunged in. They swam for an hour or so, then sat on the beach looking at the sea. Allerton could
sit for hours doing absolutely nothing. He said, "That boat out there has been warming up for the
past hour."
"I am going into town to dig the local bodegas and buy a bottle of cognac," Lee told him.
The town looked old, with limestone streets and dirty saloons crowded with sailors and
dockworkers. A shoeshine boy asked Lee if he wanted a "nice girl." Lee looked at the boy and
said in English, "No, and I don't want you either."
He bought a bottle of cognac from a Turkish trader. The store had everything: ship stores,
hardware, guns, food, liquor. Lee priced the guns: three hundred dollars for a 30-30 lever-action
Winchester carbine that sold for seventy-two dollars in the States. The Turk said duty was high on
guns. That was the reason for this price.
Lee walked back along the beach. The houses were all split bamboo on wood frame, the four
posts set directly in the ground. The simplest type of house construction: you set four heavy posts
deep in the ground and nail the house to the posts. The houses were built about six feet off the
ground. The streets were mud. Thousands of vultures roosted on the houses and walked around
the streets, pecking at offal. Lee kicked at a vulture, and the bird flapped away with an indignant
squawk.
Lee passed a bar, a large building built directly on the ground, and decided to go in for a drink.
The split-bamboo walls shook with noise. Two middle-aged wiry little men were doing an obscene
mambo routine opposite each other, their leathery faces creased in toothless smiles. The waiter
came up and smiled at Lee. He didn't have any front teeth either. Lee sat down on a short wood
bench and ordered a cognac. A boy of sixteen or so came over and sat down with Lee and smiled
an open, friendly smile. Lee smiled back and ordered a refresco for the boy. He dropped a hand
on Lee's thigh and squeezed it in thanks for the drink. The boy had uneven teeth, crowded one
over the other, but he was a young boy. Lee looked at him speculatively; he couldn't figure the
score. Was the boy giving him a come-on, or wars he just friendly? He knew that people in the
Latin American countries were not self-conscious about physical contact. Boys walked around
with their arms around each other's necks. Lee decided to play it cool. He finished his drink,
shook hands with the boy, and walked back to the hotel.
Allerton was still sitting on the porch in his swimming trunks and a short-sleeved yellow shirt,
which flapped around his thin body in the evening wind. Lee went inside to the kitchen and
ordered ice and water and glasses. He told Allerton about the Turk, the town and the boy. "Let's
go dig that bar after dinner," he said.
"And get felt up by those young boys?" said Allerton. "I should say not."
Lee laughed. He was feeling surprisingly well. The antihistamine cut his junk sickness to a vague
malaise, something he would not have noticed if he did not know what it was. He looked out over
the bay, red in the setting sun. Boats of all sizes were anchored in the bay. Lee wanted to buy a
boat and sail up and down the coast. Allerton liked the idea.
"While we are in Ecuador we must score for Yage," Lee said. "Think of it: thought control. Take
anyone apart and rebuild to your taste. Anything about somebody bugs you, you say, 'Yage! I
want that routine took clear out of his mind.' I could think of a few changes I might make in you,
doll." He looked at Allerton and licked his lips. "You'd be so much nicer after a few alterations.
You're nice now, of course, but you do have those irritating little peculiarities. I mean, you won't
do exactly what I want you to do all the time."
"Do you think there is anything in it, really?" Allerton asked.
"The Russians seem to think so. I understand Yage is the most efficient confession drug. They
have also used peyote. Ever try it?"
"No."
"Horrible stuff. Made me sick like I wanted to die. I got to puke and I can't. Just excruciating
spasms of the asparagras, or whatever you call that gadget. Finally the peyote conies up solid
like a ball of hair, solid all the way up, clogging my throat. As nasty a sensation as I ever stood
still for. The high is interesting, but hardly worth the sick stage. Your face swells around the eyes,
and the lips swell, and you look and feel like an Indian, or what you figure an Indian feels like.
Primitive, you understand. Colors are more intense, but somehow flat and two-dimensional.
Everything looks like a peyote plant. There is a nightmare undercurrent.
"I had nightmares after using it, one after the other, every time I went back to sleep. In one dream
I had rabies and looked in the mirror and my face changed and I began howling. Another dream I
had a chlorophyll habit. Me and five other chlorophyll addicts are waiting to score. We turn green
and we can't kick the chlorophyll habit. One shot and you are hung for life. We are turning into
plants. You know anything about psychiatry? Schizophrenia?"
"Not much."
"In some cases of schizophrenia a phenomenon occurs known as automatic obedience. I say,
'Stick out your tongue,' and you can't keep yourself from obeying. Whatever I say, whatever
anyone says, you must do. Get the picture? A pretty picture, isn't it, so long as you are the one
giving the orders that are automatically obeyed. Automatic obedience, synthetic schizophrenia,
mass-produced to order. That is the Russian dream, and America is not far behind. The
bureaucrats of both countries want the same thing: Control. The superego, the controlling
agency, gone cancerous and berserk. Incidentally, there is a connection between schizophrenia
and telepathy. Schizos are very telepathically sensitive, but are strictly receivers. Dig the tie-in?"
"But you wouldn't know Yage if you saw it?"
Lee thought a minute. "Much as I dislike the idea, I will have to go back to Quito and talk to a
botanist at the Botanical Institute there."
"I'm not going back to Quito for anything," said Allerton.
"I'm not going right away. I need some rest and I want to kick the Chinaman all the way out. No
need for you to go. You stay on the beach. Papa will go and get the info."
From Manta they flew on to Guayaquil. The road was flooded, so the only way to get there was
by plane or boat.
Guayaquil is built along a river, a city with many parks and squares and statues. The parks are
full of tropical trees and shrubs and vines. A tree that fans out like an umbrella, as wide as it is
tall, shades the stone benches. The people do a great deal of sitting.
One day Lee got up early and went to the market. The place was crowded. A curiously mixed
populace: Negro, Chinese, Indian, European, Arab, characters difficult to classify. Lee saw some
beautiful boys of mixed Chinese and Negro stock, slender and graceful with beautiful white teeth.
A hunchback with withered legs was playing crude bamboo panpipes, a mournful Oriental music
with the sadness of the high mountains. In deep sadness there is no place for sentimentality. It is
as final as the mountains: a fact. There it is. When you realize it, you cannot complain.
People crowded around the musician, listened a few minutes, and walked on. Lee noticed a
young man with the skin tight over his small face, looking exactly like a shrunken head. He could
not have weighed more than ninety pounds.
The musician coughed from time to time. Once he snarled when someone touched his hump,
showing his black rotten teeth. Lee gave the man a few coins. He walked on, looking at every
face he passed, looking into doorways and up at the windows of cheap hotels. An iron bedstead
painted light pink, a shirt out to dry . . . scraps of life. Lee snapped at them hungrily, like a
predatory fish cut off from his prey by a glass wall. He could not stop ramming his nose against
the glass in the nightmare search of his dream. And at the end he was standing in a dusty room
in the late afternoon sun, with an old shoe in his hand.
The city, like all Ecuador, produced a curiously baffling impression. Lee felt there was something
going on here, some undercurrent of life that was hidden from him. This was the area of the
ancient Chimu pottery, where salt shakers and water pitchers were nameless obscenities: two
men on all fours engaged in sodomy formed the handle for the top of a kitchen pot.
What happens when there is no limit? What is the fate of The Land Where Anything Goes? Men
changing into huge centipedes . . . centipedes besieging the houses ... a man tied to a couch and
a centipede ten feet long rearing up over him. Is this literal? Did some hideous metamorphosis
occur? What is the meaning of the centipede symbol?
Lee got on a bus and rode to the end of the line. He took another bus. He rode out to the river
and drank a soda, and watched some boys swimming in the dirty river. The river looked as if
nameless monsters might rise from the green-brown water. Lee saw a lizard two feet long run up
the opposite bank.
He walked back towards town. He passed a group of boys on a corner. One of the boys was so
beautiful that the image cut Lee's senses like a wire whip. A slight involuntary sound of pain
escaped from Lee's lips. He turned around, as though looking at the street name. The boy was
laughing at some joke, a high-pitched laugh, happy and gay. Lee walked on.
Six or seven boys, aged twelve to fourteen, were playing in a heap of rubbish on the waterfront.
One of the boys was urinating against a post and smiling at the other boys. The boys noticed Lee.
Now their play was overtly sexual, with an undercurrent of mockery. They looked at Lee and
whispered and laughed. Lee looked at them openly, a cold, hard stare of naked lust. He felt the
tearing ache of limitless desire.
He focused on one boy, the image sharp and clear, as if seen through a telescope with the other
boys and the waterfront blacked out. The boy vibrated with life like a young animal. A wide grin
showed sharp, white teeth. Under the torn shirt Lee glimpsed the thin body.
He could feel himself in the body of the boy. Fragmentary memories . . . the smell of cocoa beans
drying in the sun, bamboo tenements, the warm dirty river, the swamps and rubbish heaps on the
outskirts of the town. He was with the other boys, sitting on the stone floor of a deserted house.
The roof was gone. The stone walls were falling down. Weeds and vines grew over the walls and
stretched across the floor.
The boys were taking down their torn pants. Lee lifted his thin buttocks to slip down his pants. He
could feel the stone floor. He had his pants down to his ankles. His knees were clasped together,
and the other boys were trying to pull them apart. He gave in, and they held his knees open. He
looked at them and smiled, and slipped his hand down over his stomach. Another boy who was
standing up dropped his pants and stood there with his hands on his hips, looking down at his
erect organ.
A boy sat down by Lee and reached over between his legs. Lee felt the orgasm blackout in the
hot sun. He stretched out and threw his arm over his eyes. Another boy rested his head on his
stomach. Lee could feel the warmth of the other's head, itching a little where the hair touched
Lee's stomach.
Now he was in a bamboo tenement. An oil lamp lit a woman's body. Lee could feel desire for the
woman through the other's body. "I'm not queer," he thought. "I'm disembodied."
Lee walked on, thinking, "What can I do? Take them back to my hotel? They are willing enough.
For a few Sucres. ..." He felt a killing hate for the stupid, ordinary, disapproving people who kept
him from doing what he wanted to do. "Someday I am going to have things just like I want," he
said to himself. "And if any moralizing son of a bitch gives me any static, they will fish him out of
the river."
Lee's plan involved a river. He lived on the river and ran things to please himself. He grew his
own weed and poppies and cocaine, and he had a young native boy for an all-purpose servant.
Boats were moored in the dirty river. Great masses of water hyacinths floated by. The river was a
good half-mile across.
Lee walked up to a little park. There was a statue of Bolivar, "The Liberating Fool" as Lee called
him, shaking hands with someone else. Both of them looked tired and disgusted and rocking
queer, so queer it rocked you. Lee stood looking at the statue. Then he sat down on a stone
bench facing the river. Everyone looked at Lee when he sat down. Lee looked back. He did not
have the American reluctance to meet the gaze of a stranger. The others looked away, and lit
cigarettes and resumed their conversations.
Lee sat there looking at the dirty yellow river. He couldn't see half an inch under the surface.
From time to time, small fish jumped ahead of a boat. There were trim, expensive sailing boats
from the yacht club, with hollow masts and beautiful lines. There were dugout canoes with
outboard motors and cabins of split bamboo. Two old rusty battleships were moored in the middle
of the riverthe Ecuadoran Navy. Lee sat there a full hour, then got up and walked back to the
hotel. It was three o'clock. Allerton was still in bed. Lee sat down on the edge of the bed. "It's
three o'clock, Gene. Time to get up."
"What for?"
"You want to spend your life in bed? Come on out and dig the town with me. I saw some beautiful
boys on the waterfront. The real uncut boy stuff. Such teeth, such smiles. Young boys vibrating
with life."
"All right. Stop drooling."
"What have they got that I want, Gene? Do you know?"
"No."
"They have maleness, of course. So have I. I want myself the same way I want others. I'm
disembodied. I can't use my own body for some reason." He put out his hand. Allerton dodged
away.
"What's the matter?"
"I thought you were going to run your hand down my ribs."
"I wouldn't do that. Think I'm queer or something?"
"Frankly, yes."
"You do have nice ribs. Show me the broken one. Is that it there?" Lee ran his hand halfway
down Allerton's ribs. "Or is it further down?"
"Oh, go away."
"But, Gene ... I am due, you know."
"Yes, I suppose you are."
"Of course, if you'd rather wait until tonight. These tropical nights are so romantic. That way we
could take twelve hours or so and do the thing right." Lee ran his hands down over Allerton's
stomach. He could see that Allerton was a little excited.
Allerton said, "Maybe it would be better now. You know I like to sleep alone."
"Yes, I know. Too bad. If I had my way we'd sleep every night all wrapped around each other like
hibernating rattlesnakes."
Lee was taking off his clothes. He lay down beside Allerton. "Wouldn't it be booful if we should
juth run together into one gweat big blob," he said in baby talk. "Am I giving you the horrors?"
"Indeed you are."
Allerton surprised Lee by an unusual intensity of response. At the climax he squeezed Lee hard
around the ribs. He sighed deeply and closed his eyes.
Lee smoothed his eyebrows with his thumbs. "Do you mind that?" he asked.
"Not terribly."
"But you do enjoy it sometimes? The whole deal, I mean."
"Oh, yes."
Lee lay on his back with one cheek against Allerton's shoulder, and went to sleep.
Lee decided to apply for a passport before leaving Guayaquil. He was changing clothes to visit
the embassy, and talking to Allerton. "Wouldn't do to wear high shoes. The Consul is probably an
elegant pansy. . . . 'My dear, can you believe it? High shoes. I mean real old button-hooky shoes.
I simply couldn't take my eyes off those shoes. I'm afraid I have no idea what he wanted.'
"I hear they are purging the State Department of queers. If they do, they will be operating with a
skeleton staff , . . ah, here they are."Lee was putting on a pair of low shoes. "Imagine walking in
on the Consul and asking him right out for money to eat on. ... He rears back and claps a scented
handkerchief over his mouth, as if you had dropped a dead lobster on his desk: 'You're broke!
Really, I don't know why you come to me with this revolting disclosure. You might show a
modicum of consideration. You must realize how distasteful this sort of thing is. Have you no
pride?'"
Lee turned to Allerton. "How do I look? Don't want to look too good, or he will be trying to get in
my pants. Maybe you'd better go. That way we'll get our passports by tomorrow."
Listen to this." Lee was reading from a
Guayaquil paper. "It seems that the Peruvian delegates at the anti-tuberculosis congress in
Salinas appeared at the meeting carrying huge maps on which were shown the parts of Ecuador
appropriated by Peru in the 1939 war. The Ecuadoran doctors might go to the meeting twirling
shrunken heads of Peruvian soldiers on their watch chains."
Allerton had found an article about the heroic fight put up by Ecuador's wolves of the sea.
"Their what?"
"That's what it says: Lobos del Mar. It seems that one officer stuck by his gun, even though the
mechanism was no longer operating."
"Sounds simpleminded to me."
They decided to look for a boat in Las Playas. Las Playas was cold and the water was rough and
muddy, a dreary middle-class resort. The food was terrible, but the room without meals was
almost the same as full pensin. They tried one lunch. A plate of rice without sauce, without
anything. Allerton said, "I am hurt." A tasteless soup with some fibrous material floating in it that
looked like soft, white wood. The main course was a nameless meat as impossible to identify as
to eat.
Lee said, "The cook has barricaded himself in the kitchen. He is shoving this slop out through a
slot." The food was, as a matter of fact, passed out through a slot in a door from a dark, smoky
room where, presumably, it was being prepared.
They decided they would go on to Salinas the next day. That night Lee wanted to go to bed with
Allerton, but he refused and the next morning Lee said he was sorry he asked so soon after the
last time, which was a breach of contract.
Allerton said, "I don't like people who apologize at breakfast."
Lee said, "Really, Gene, aren't you taking an unfair advantage? Like someone was junk sick and I
don't use junk. I say, 'Sick, really? I don't know why you tell me about your disgusting condition.
You might at least have the decency to keep it to yourself if you are sick. I hate sick people. You
must realize how distasteful it is to see you sneezing and yawning and retching. Why don't you go
someplace where I won't have to look at you? You've no idea how tiresome you are, or how
disgusting. Have you no pride?'"
Allerton said, 'That isn't fair at all."
"It isn't supposed to be fair. Just a routine for your amusement, containing a modicum of truth.
Hurry and finish your breakfast. We'll miss the Salinas bus."
Salinas had the quiet, dignified air of an upper-class resort town. They had come in the off
season. When they went to swim they found out why this was not the season: the Humboldt
current makes the water cold during the summer months. Allerton put his foot in the water and
said, "It's nothing but cold," and refused to go in. Lee plunged in and swam for a few minutes.
Time seemed to speed up in Salinas. Lee would eat lunch and lie on the beach. After a period
that seemed like an hour, or at most two hours, he saw the sun low in the sky: six o'clock. Allerton
reported the same experience.
Lee went to Quito to get information on the Yage. Allerton stayed in Salinas. Lee was back five
days later.
"Yage is also known to the Indians as Ayahuasca. Scientific name is Bannisteria caapi," Lee
spread a map out on the bed. "It grows in high jungle on the Amazon side of the Andes. We will
go on to Puyo. That is the end of the road. We should be able to locate someone there who can
deal with the Indians, and get the Yage."
They spent a night in Guayaquil. Lee got drunk before dinner and slept through a movie. They
went back to the hotel to go to bed and get an early start in the morning. Lee poured himself
some brandy and sat down on the edge of Allerton's bed. "You look sweet tonight," he said,
taking off his glasses. How about a little kiss? Huh?"
"Oh, go away," said Allerton.
"Okay kid, if you say so. There's plenty of time," Lee poured some more brandy in his glass and
lay down on his own bed.
"You know, Gene, not only have they got poor people in this jerkwater country. They also got like
rich people. I saw some on the train going up to Quito. I expect they keep a plane revved up in
the back yard. I can see them loading television sets and radios and golf clubs and tennis rackets
and shotguns into the plane, and then trying to boot a prize Brahma bull in on top of the other
junk, so the windup is the plane won't get off the ground.
"It's a small, unstable, undeveloped country. Economic setup exactly the way I figured it: all raw
materials, lumber, food, labor, rent, very cheap. All manufactured goods very high, because of
import duty. The duty is supposed to protect Ecuadoran industry. There is no Ecuadoran industry.
No production here. The people who can produce won't produce, because they don't want any
money tied up here. They want to be ready to pull out right now, with a bundle of cold cash,
preferably U.S. dollars. They are unduly alarmed. Rich people are generally frightened. I don't
know why. Something to do with a guilt complex, I imagine. Quin sabe? I have not come to
psychoanalyze Caesar, but to protect his person. At a price, of course. What they need here is a
security department, to keep the underdog under."
"Yes," said Allerton. "We must secure uniformity of opinion."
"Opinion! What are we running here, a debating society? Give me one year and the people won't
have any opinions. 'Now just fall in line here folks, for your nice tasty stew of fish heads and rice
and oleomargarine. And over here for your ration of free lush laced with opium.' So if they get out
of line, we jerk the junk out of the lush and they're all lying around shitting in their pants, too weak
to move. An eating habit is the worst habit you can have. Another angle is malaria. A debilitating
affliction, tailor-made to water down the revolutionary spirit."
Lee smiled. "Just imagine some old humanist German doctor. I say, 'Well, Doc, you done a great
job here with malaria. Cut the incidence down almost to nothing.'
"'Ach, yes. We do our best, is it not? You see this line in the graph? The line shows the decline in
this sickness in the past ten years since we commence with our treatment program.'
"'Yeah, Doc. Now look, I want to see that line go back where it came from.'
"'Ach, this you cannot mean.'
"'And another thing. See if you can't import an especially debilitating strain of hookworm.'
"The mountain people we can always immobilize by taking their blankets away, leaving them with
the enterprise of a frozen lizard."
The inside wall to Lee's room stopped about three feet from the ceiling to allow for ventilating the
next room, which was an inside room with no windows. The occupant of the next room said
something in Spanish to the effect Lee should be quiet.
"Ah, shut up," said Lee, leaping to his feet. "I'll nail a blanket over that slot! I'll cut off your fucking
air! You only breathe with my permission. You're the occupant of an inside room, a room without
windows. So remember your place and shut your poverty-stricken mouth!"
A stream of chingas and cabrones replied.
"Hombre," Lee asked, "En dnde est su cultura?"
"Let's hit the sack," said Allerton. "I'm tired."
They took a river boat to Babahoya. Swinging in hammocks, sipping brandy, and watching the
jungle slide by. Springs, moss, beautiful clear streams and trees up to two hundred feet high. Lee
and Allerton were silent as the boat powered upriver, penetrating the jungle stillness with its
lawnmower whine. From Babahoya they took a bus over the Andes to Ambato, a cold, jolting
fourteen-hour ride. They stopped for a snack of chick-peas at a hut at the top of the mountain
pass, far above the tree line. A few young native men in gray felt hats ate their chickpeas in sullen
resignation. Several guinea pigs were squeaking and scurrying around on the dirt floor of the hut.
Their cries reminded Lee of the guinea pig he owned as a child in the Fairmont Hotel in St.
Louis, when the family was waiting to move into their new house on Price Road. He remembered
the way the pig shrieked, and the stink of its cage.
They passed the snow-covered peak of Chimborazo, cold in the moonlight and the constant wind
of the high Andes. The view from the high mountain pass seemed from another, larger planet
than Earth. Lee and Allerton huddled together under a blanket, drinking brandy, the smell of wood
smoke in their nostrils. They were both wearing Army-surplus jackets, zipped up over sweatshirts
to keep out the cold and wind. Allerton seemed insubstantial as a phantom; Lee could almost see
through him, to the empty phantom bus outside.
From Ambato to Puyo, along the edge of a gorge a thousand feet deep. There were waterfalls
and forests and streams running down over the roadway, as they descended into the lush green
valley. Several times the bus stopped to remove large stones that had slid down onto the road.
Lee was talking on the bus to an old prospector named Morgan, who had been thirty years in the
jungle. Lee asked him about Ayahuasca.
"Acts on them like opium," Morgan said. "All my Indians use it. Can't get any work out of them for
three days when they get on Ayahuasca."
"I think there may be a market for it," Lee said.
Morgan said, "I can get any amount."
They passed the prefabricated bungalows of Shell Mara. The Shell Company had spent two
years and twenty million dollars, found no oil, and pulled out. They got into Puyo late at night, and
found a room in a ramshackle hotel near the general store.
Lee and Allerton were too exhausted to speak, and they fell asleep at once.
Next day Old Man Morgan went around with Lee, trying to score for Ayahuasca. Allerton was still
sleeping. They hit a wall of evasion. One man said he would bring some the following day. Lee
knew he would not bring any.
They went to a little saloon run by a mulatto woman. She pretended not to know what Ayahuasca
was. Lee asked if Ayahuasca was illegal. "No," said Morgan, "but the people are suspicious of
strangers."
They sat there drinking aguardiente mixed with hot water and sugar and cinnamon. Lee said his
racket was shrunk-down heads. Morgan figured they could start a head-shrinking plant. "Heads
rolling off the assembly line," he said. "You can't buy those heads at any price. The government
forbids it, you know. The blighters were killing people to sell the heads."
Morgan had an inexhaustible fund of old dirty jokes. He was talking about some local character
from Canada.
"How did he get down here?" Lee asked.
Morgan chuckled. "How did we all get down here? Spot of trouble in our own country, right?"
Lee nodded, without saying anything.
Old Man Morgan went back to Shell Mara on the afternoon bus to collect some money owed him.
Lee talked to a Dutchman named Sawyer who was farming near Puyo. Sawyer told him there
was an American botanist living in the jungle, a few hours out of Puyo.
"He is trying to develop some medicine. I forget the name. If he succeeds in concentrating this
medicine, he says he will make a fortune. Now he is having a hard time. He has nothing to eat out
there."
Lee said, "I am interested in medicinal plants. I may pay him a visit."
"He will be glad to see you. But take along some flour or tea or something. They have nothing out
there."
Later Lee said to Allerton, "A botanist! What a break. He is our man. We will go tomorrow."
"We can hardly pretend we just happened by," said Allerton. "How are you going to explain your
visit?"
"I will think of something. Best tell him right out I want to score for Yage. I figure maybe there is a
buck in it for both of us. According to what I hear, he is flat on his ass. We are lucky to hit him in
that condition. If he was in the chips and drinking champagne out of galoshes in the whorehouses
of Puyo, he would hardly be interested to sell me a few hundred Sucres' worth of Yage. And,
Gene, for the love of Christ, when we do overhaul this character, please don't say, 'Doctor Cotter,
I presume.'"
The hotel room in Puyo was damp and cold. The houses across the street were blurred by the
pouring rain, like a city under water. Lee was picking up articles off the bed and shoving them into
a rubberized sack. A .32 automatic pistol, some cartridges wrapped in oiled silk, a small frying
pan, tea and flour packed in cans and sealed with adhesive tape, two quarts of Puro.
Allerton said, "This booze is the heaviest item, and the bottle's got like sharp edges. Why don't
we leave it here?"
"We'll have to loosen his tongue," Lee said. He picked up the sack and handed Allerton a shiny
new machete.
"Let's wait till the rain stops," said Allerton.
"Wait till the rain stops!" Lee collapsed on the bed with loud, simulated laughter. "Haw haw haw!
Wait till the rain stops! They got a saying down here, like I'll pay you what I owe you when it stops
raining in Puyo.' Haw haw."
"We had two clear days when we first got here."
"I know. A latter-day miracle. There's a movement on foot to canonize the local padre. Vmonos,
cabrn."
Lee slapped Allerton's shoulder and they walked out in the rain, slipping on the wet cobblestones
of the main street.
The trail was corduroy. The wood of the trail was covered with a film of mud. They cut long canes
to keep from slipping, but it was slow walking. High jungle with hardwood forest on both sides of
the trail, and very little undergrowth. Everywhere was water, springs and streams and rivers of
clear, cold water.
"Good trout water," Lee said.
They stopped at several houses to ask where Cotter's place was. Everyone said they were
headed right. How far? Two, three hours. Maybe more. Word seemed to have gone ahead. One
man they met on the trail shifted his machete to shake hands and said at once, "You are looking
for Cotter? He is in his house now."
"How far?" Lee asked.
The man looked at Lee and Allerton. "It will take you about three hours more."
They walked on and on. It was late afternoon now. They flipped a coin to see who would ask at
the next house. Allerton lost.
"He says three more hours," Allerton said.
"We been hearing that for the past six hours."
Allerton wanted to rest. Lee said, "No. If you rest, your legs get stiff. It's the worst thing you can
do."
"Who told you that?"
"Old Man Morgan."
"Well, Morgan or no, I am going to rest."
"Don't make it too long. It will be a hell of a note if we get caught short, stumbling over snakes
and jaguars in the dark and falling into quebrajas that's what they call these deep crevices cut
by streams of water. Some of them are sixty feet deep and four feet wide. Just room enough to
fall in."
They stopped to rest in a deserted house. The walls were gone, but there was a roof that looked
pretty sound. "We could stop here in a pinch," said Allerton, looking around.
"A definite pinch. No blankets."
It was dark when they reached Cotter's place, a small thatched hut in a clearing. Cotter was a
wiry little man in his middle fifties. Lee observed that the reception was a bit cool. Lee brought out
the liquor, and they all had a drink. Cotter's wife, a large, strong-looking, red-haired woman, made
some tea with cinnamon to cut the kerosene taste of the Puro. Lee got drunk on three drinks.
Cotter was asking Lee a lot of questions. "How did you happen to come here? Where are you
from? How long have you been in Ecuador? Who told you about me? Are you a tourist or
travelling on business?"
Lee was drunk. He began talking in junky lingo, explaining that he was looking for Yage, or
Ayahuasca. He understood the Russians and the Americans were experimenting with this drug.
Lee said he figured there might be a buck in the deal for both of them. The more Lee talked, the
cooler Cotter's manner became. The man was clearly suspicious, but why or of what, Lee could
not decide.
Dinner was pretty good, considering the chief ingredient was a sort of fibrous root and bananas.
After dinner, Cotter's wife said, 'These boys must be tired, Jim."
Cotter led the way with a flashlight that developed power by pressing a lever. A cot about thirty
inches wide made of bamboo slats. "I guess you can both make out here," he said. Mrs. Cotter
was spreading a blanket on the cot as a mattress, with another blanket as cover. Lee lay down on
the cot next to the wall. Allerton lay on the outside, and Cotter adjusted a mosquito net.
"Mosquitos?" Lee asked.
"No, vampire bats," Cotter said shortly. "Good night."
"Good night."
Lee's muscles ached from the long walk. He was very tired. He put one arm across Allerton's
chest, and snuggled close to the boy's body. A feeling of deep tenderness flowed out from Lee's
body at the warm contact. He snuggled closer and stroked Allerton's shoulder gently. Allerton
moved irritably, pushing Lee's arm away.
"Slack off, will you, and go to sleep," said Allerton. He turned on his side, with his back to Lee.
Lee drew his arm back. His whole body contracted with the shock. Slowly he put his hand under
his cheek. He felt a deep hurt, as though he were bleeding inside. Tears ran down his face.
He was standing in front of the Ship Ahoy. The place looked deserted. He could hear someone
crying. He saw his little son, and knelt down and took the child in his arms. The sound of crying
came closer, a wave of sadness, and now he was crying, his body shaking with sobs.
He held little Willy close against his chest. A group of people were standing there in convict suits.
Lee wondered what they were doing there and why he was crying.
When Lee woke up, he still felt the deep sadness of his dream. He stretched out a hand towards
Allerton, then pulled it back. He turned around to face the wall.
Next morning, Lee felt dry and irritable and empty of feeling. He borrowed Cotter's .22 rifle and
set out with Allerton to have a look at the jungle. The jungle seemed empty of life.
"Cotter says the Indians have cleaned most of the game out of the area," said Allerton. "They all
have shotguns from the money they made working for Shell."
They walked along a trail. Huge trees, some over a hundred feet high, matted with vines, cut off
the sunlight.
"May God grant we kill some living creature," Lee said. "Gene, I hear something squawking over
there. I'm going to try and shoot it."
"What is it?"
"How should I know? It's alive, isn't it?"
Lee pushed through the undergrowth beside the trail. He tripped on a vine and fell into a sawtoothed
plant. When he tried to get up, a hundred sharp points caught his clothes and stuck into
his flesh.
"Gene!" he called. "Help me! I been seized by a man-eating plant. Gene, cut me free with the
machete!"
They did not see a living animal in the jungle.
Cotter was supposedly trying to find a way to extract curare from the arrow poison the Indians
used. He told Lee there were yellow crows to be found in the region, and yellow catfish with
extremely poisonous spines. His wife had gotten spined, and Cotter had to administer morphine
for the intense pain. He was a medical doctor.
Lee was struck by the story of the Monkey Woman: a brother and sister had come down to this
part of Ecuador, to live the simple healthful life on roots and berries and nuts and palm hearts.
Two years later a search-party had found them, hobbling along on improvised crutches, toothless
and suffering from half-healed fractures. It seems there was no calcium in the area. Chickens
couldn't lay eggs, there was nothing to form the shell. Cows gave milk, but it was watery and
translucent, with no calcium in it.
The brother went back to civilization and steaks, but the Monkey Woman was still there. She
earned her monicker by watching what monkeys ate: anything a monkey eats, she can eat,
anybody can eat. It's a handy thing to know, if you get lost in the jungle. Also handy to bring along
some calcium tablets. Even Cotter's wife had lost her teeth "inna thervith." His were long gone.
He had a five-foot viper guarding his house from prowlers after his precious curare notes. He also
had two tiny monkeys, cute but ill-tempered and equipped with sharp little teeth, and a two-toed
sloth. Sloths live on fruit in trees, swinging along upside down and making a sound like a crying
baby. On the ground they are helpless. This one just lay there and thrashed about and hissed.
Cotter warned them not to touch it, even on the back of the neck, since it could reach around with
its strong, sharp claws and drive them through one's hand, then pull it to its mouth and start
biting.
Cotter was evasive when Lee asked about Ayahuasca. He said he was not sure Yage and
Ayahuasca were the same plant. Ayahuasca was connected with Brujenawitchcraft. He himself
was a white Brujo. He had access to Brujo secrets. Lee had no such access.
"It would take you years to gain their confidence."
Lee said he did not have years to spend on the deal. "Can't you get me some?" he asked.
Cotter looked at him sourly. "I have been out here three years," he said.
Lee tried to come on like a scientist. "I want to investigate the properties of this drug," he said. "I
am willing to take some as an experiment."
Cotter said, "Well, I could take you down to Canela and talk to the Brujo. He will give you some if
I say so."
"That would be very kind," said Lee.
Cotter did not say any more about going to Canela. He did say a lot about how short they were on
supplies, and how he had no time to spare from his experiments with a curare substitute. After
three days Lee saw he was wasting time, and told Cotter they were leaving. Cotter made no
attempt to conceal his relief.
Epilogue:
Mexico City Return
Every time I hit Panama, the place is exactly one month, two months, six months more nowhere,
like the course of a degenerative illness. A shift from arithmetical to geometrical progression
seems to have occurred. Something ugly and ignoble and subhuman is cooking in this mongrel
town of pimps and whores and recessive genes, this degraded leech on the Canal.
A smog of bum kicks hangs over Panama in the wet heat. Everyone here is telepathic on the
paranoid level. I walked around with my camera and saw a wood and corrugated iron shack on a
limestone cliff in Old Panama, like a penthouse. I wanted a picture of this excrescence, with the
albatrosses and vultures wheeling over it against the hot gray sky. My hands holding the camera
were slippery with sweat, and my shirt stuck to my body like a wet condom.
An old hag in the shack saw me taking the picture. They always know when you are taking their
picture, especially in Panama. She went into an angry consultation with some other ratty-looking
people I could not see clearly. Then she walked to the edge of a perilous balcony and made an
ambiguous gesture of hostility. Many so-called primitives are afraid of cameras. There is in fact
something obscene and sinister about photography, a desire to imprison, to incorporate, a sexual
intensity of pursuit. I walked on and shot some boysyoung, alive, unconscious playing
baseball. They never glanced in my direction.
Down by the waterfront I saw a dark young Indian on a fishing boat. He knew I wanted to take his
picture, and every time I swung the camera into position he would look up with young male
sulkiness. I finally caught him leaning against the bow of the boat with languid animal grace, idly
scratching one shoulder. A long white scar across right shoulder and collarbone. I put away my
camera and leaned over the hot concrete wall, looking at him. In my mind I was running a finger
along the scar, down across his naked copper chest and stomach, every cell aching with
deprivation. I pushed away from the wall muttering
"Oh Jesus" and walked away, looking around for something to photograph.
A Negro with a felt hat was leaning on the porch rail of a wooden house built on a dirty limestone
foundation. I was across the street under a movie marquee. Every time I prepared my camera he
would lift his hat and look at me, muttering insane imprecations. I finally snapped him from behind
a pillar. On a balcony over this character a shirtless young man was washing. I could see the
Negro and Near Eastern blood in him, the rounded face and caf-au-lait mulatto skin, the smooth
body of undifferentiated flesh with not a muscle showing. He looked up from his washing like an
animal scenting danger. I caught him when the five o'clock whistle blew. An old photographer's
trick: wait for a distraction.
I went into Chico's Bar for a rum Coke. I never liked this place, nor any other bar in Panama, but
it used to be endurable and had some good numbers on the juke box. Now there was nothing but
this awful Oklahoma honky-tonk music, like the bellowings of an anxious cow: "You're Drivin'
Nails in my Coffin" "It Wasn't God Made Honky Tonk Angels""Your Cheatin' Heart."
The servicemen in the joint all had that light-concussion Canal Zone look: cow-like and blunted,
as if they had undergone special G.I. processing and were immunized against contact on the
intuition level, telepathic sender and receiver excised. You ask them a question, they answer
without friendliness or hostility. No warmth, no contact. Conversation is impossible. They just
have nothing to say. They sit around buying drinks for the B-girls, making lifeless passes which
the girls brush off like flies, and playing that whining music on the juke box. One young man with
a pimply adenoidal face kept trying to touch a girl's breast. She would brush his hand away, then
it would creep back as if endowed with autonomous insect life. A B-girl sat next to me, and I
bought her one drink. She ordered good Scotch, yet. "Panama, how I hate your cheatin' guts," I
thought. She had a shallow bird brain and perfect Stateside English, like a recording. Stupid
people can learn a language quick and easy because there is nothing going on in there to keep it
out.
She wanted another drink. I said "No." She said, "Why are you so mean?" I said, "Look, if I run
out of money, who is going to buy my drinks? Will you?"
She looked surprised, and said slowly, "Yes. You are right. Excuse me."
I walked down the main drag. A pimp seized my arm. "I gotta fourteen-year-old girl, Jack. Puerto
Rican. How's about it?"
"She's middle-aged already," I told him. "I want a six-year-old virgin and none of that sealedwhile-
you-wait shit. Don't try palming your old fourteen-year-old bats off on me." I left him there
with his mouth open.
I went into a store to price some Panama hats. The young man behind the counter started
singing: "Making friends, losing money."
"This spic bastard is strictly on the chisel," I decided.
He showed me some two-dollar hats. "Fifteen dollar," he said.
"Your prices are way out of line," I told him, and turned and walked out. He followed me onto the
street: "Just a minute, Mister." I walked on.
That night I had a recurrent dream: I was back in Mexico City, talking to Art Gonzalez, a former
roommate of Allerton's. I asked him where Allerton was, and he said, "In Agua Diente." This was
somewhere south of Mexico City, and I was inquiring about a bus connection. I have dreamed
many times I was back in Mexico City, talking to Art or Allerton's best friend, Johnny White, and
asking where he was.
I flew up to Mexico City. I was a little nervous going through the airport; some cop or Immigration
inspector might spot me. I decided to stick close to the attractive young tourist I had met on the
plane. I had packed my hat, and when I got off the plane I took off my glasses. I slung my camera
over my shoulder.
"Let's take a cab into town. Split the fare. Cheaper that way," I said to my tourist. We walked
through the airport like father and son. "Yes," I was saying, "that old boy in Guatemala wanted to
charge me two dollars from the Palace Hotel out to the airport. I told him uno." I held up one
finger. No one looked at us. Two tourists.
We got into a taxi. The driver said twelve pesos for both to the center of town.
"Wait a minute," the tourist said in English. "No meter. Where your meter? You got to have a
meter."
The driver asked me to explain that he was authorized to carry airline passengers to town without
a meter.
"No!" the tourist shouted. "I not tourist. I live in Mexico City. Sabe Hotel Colmena? I live in Hotel
Colmena. Take me to town but I pay what is on meter. I call police. Polica. You're required by
law to have a meter."
"Oh God," I thought. "That's all I need, this jerk should call the law." I could see cops
accumulating around the cab, not knowing what to do and calling other cops. The tourist got out
of the cab with his suitcase. He was taking down the number.
"I call polica plenty quick," he said.
I said, "Well, I think I'll take this cab anyway. Won't get into town much cheaper. . . . Vmonos," I
said to the driver.
I checked into an eight-peso hotel near Sears, and walked over to Lola's, my stomach cold with
excitement. The bar was in a different place, redecorated, with new furniture. But there was the
same old bartender behind the bar, with his gold tooth and his moustache.
"Cmo est?" he said. We shook hands. He asked where I had been, and I told him South
America. I sat down with a Delaware Punch. The place was empty, but someone I knew was
bound to come in sooner or later.
The Major walked in. A retired Army man, gray-haired, vigorous, stocky. I ran through the list
crisply with the Major:
"Johnny White, Russ Morton, Pete Crowly, Ike Scranton?"
"Los Angeles, Alaska, Idaho, don't know, still around. He's always around."
"And oh, uh, whatever happened to Allerton?"
"Allerton? Don't believe I know him."
"See you."
"'Night, Lee. Take it easy."
I walked over to Sears and looked through the magazines. In one called Balls: For Real Men, I
was looking at a photo of a Negro hanging from a tree: "I Saw Them Swing Sonny Goons." A
hand fell on my shoulder. I turned, and there was Gale, another retired Army man. He had the
subdued air of the reformed drunk. I ran through the list.
"Most everybody is gone," Gale said. "I never see those guys anyway, never hang around Lola's
anymore."
I asked about Allerton.
"Allerton?"
"Tall skinny kid. Friend of Johnny White and Art Gonzalez."
"He's gone too."
"How long ago?" No need to play it cool and casual with Gale. He wouldn't notice anything.
"I saw him about a month ago on the other side of the street."
"See you."
"See you."
I put the magazine away slowly and walked outside and leaned against a post. Then I walked
back to Lola's. Burns was sitting at a table, drinking a beer with his maimed hand.
"Hardly anybody around. Johnny White and Tex and Crosswheel are in Los Angeles."
I was looking at his hand.
"Did you hear about Allerton?" he asked.
I said, "No."
"He went down to South America or some place. With an Army colonel. Allerton went along as
guide."
"So? How long has he been gone?"
"About six months."
"Must have been right after I left."
"Yeah. Just about then."
I got Art Gonzalez's address from Burns and went over to see him. He was drinking a beer in a
shop across from his hotel, and called me over. Yes, Allerton left about five months ago and went
along as guide to a colonel and his wife.
"They were going to sell the car in Guatemala. A '48 Cadillac. I felt there was something not quite
right about the deal. But Allerton never told me anything definite. You know how he is." Art
seemed surprised I had not heard from Allerton. "Nobody has heard anything from him since he
left. It worries me."
I wondered what he could be doing, and where. Guatemala is expensive, San Salvador
expensive and jerkwater. Costa Rica? I regretted not having stopped off in San Jose on the way
up.
Gonzalez and I went through the where-is-so-and-so routine. Mexico City is a terminal of spacetime
travel, a waiting room where you grab a quick drink while you wait for your train. That is why
I can stand to be in Mexico City or New York. You are not stuck there; by the fact of being there
at all, you are travelling. But in Panama, crossroads of the world, you are exactly so much aging
tissue. You have to make arrangements with Pan Am or the Dutch Line for removal of your body.
Otherwise, it would stay there and rot in the muggy heat, under a galvanized iron roof.
That night I dreamed I finally found Allerton, hiding out in some Central American backwater. He
seemed surprised to see me after all this time. In the dream I was a finder of missing persons.
"Mr. Allerton, I represent the Friendly Finance Company. Haven't you forgotten something, Gene?
You're supposed to come and see us every third Tuesday. We've been lonely for you in the
office. We don't like to say 'Pay up or else.' It's not a friendly thing to say. I wonder if you have
ever read the contract all the way through? I have particular reference to Clause 6(x) which can
only be deciphered with an electron microscope and a virus filter. I wonder if you know just what
'or else' means, Gene?
"Aw, I know how it is with you young kids. You get chasing after some floozie and forget all about
Friendly Finance, don't you? But Friendly Finance doesn't forget you. Like the song say, 'No
hiding place down there.' Not when the old Skip Tracer goes out on a job."
The Skip Tracer's face went blank and dreamy. His mouth fell open, showing teeth hard and
yellow as old ivory. Slowly his body slid down in the leather armchair until the back of the chair
pushed his hat down over his eyes, which gleamed in the hat's shade, catching points of light like
an opal. He began humming "Johnny's So Long at the Fair" over and over. The humming stopped
abruptly, in the middle of a phrase.
The Skip Tracer was talking in a voice languid and intermittent, like music down a windy street.
"You meet all kinds on this job, Kid. Every now and then some popcorn citizen walks in the office
and tries to pay Friendly Finance with this shit."
He let one arm swing out, palm up, over the side of the chair. Slowly he opened a thin brown
hand, with purple-blue fingertips, to reveal a roll of yellow thousand-dollar bills. The hand turned
over, palm down, and fell back against the chair. His eyes closed.
Suddenly his head dropped to one side and his tongue fell out. The bills dropped from his hand,
one after the other, and lay there crumpled on the red tile floor. A gust of warm spring wind blew
dirty pink curtains into the room. The bills rustled across the room and settled at Allerton's feet.
Imperceptibly the Skip Tracer straightened up, and a slit of light went on behind the eyelids.
"Keep that in case you're caught short, Kid," he said. "You know how it is in these spic hotels.
You gotta carry your own paper."
The Skip Tracer leaned forward, his elbows on his knees. Suddenly he was standing up, as if
tilted out of the chair, and in the same upward movement he pushed the hat back from his eyes
with one finger. He walked to the door and turned, with his right hand on the knob. He polished
the nails of his left hand on the lapel of his worn glen plaid suit. The suit gave out an odor of mold
when he moved. There was mildew under the lapels and in the trouser cuffs. He looked at his
nails.
"Oh, uh . . . about your, uh . . . account. I'll be around soon. That is, within the next few. ..." The
Skip Tracer's voice was muffled.
"We'll come to some kind of an agreement." Now the voice was loud and clear. The door opened
and wind blew through the room. The door closed and the curtains settled back, one curtain
trailing over a sofa as though someone had taken it and tossed it there.
